# Process creation in io_uring [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 20, 2024 

Back in 2022, Josh Triplett [presented a plan](/Articles/908268/) to implement a "spawn new process" functionality in the io_uring subsystem. There was a fair amount of interest at the time, but developers got distracted, and the work did not progress. Now, Gabriel Krisman Bertazi has returned with [a patch series](/ml/all/20241209234316.4132786-1-krisman@suse.de) updating and improving Triplett's work. While interest in this functionality remains, it may still take some time before it is ready for merging into the mainline. 

A new process in Linux is created with one of the variants of the [`clone()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/clone.2.html) system call. As its name suggests, `clone()` creates a copy of the calling process, running the same code. Much of the time, though, the newly created process quickly calls [`execve()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/execve.2.html) or [`execveat()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/execveat.2.html) to run a different program, perhaps after performing a bit of cleanup. There has long been interest in a system call that would combine these operations efficiently, but nothing like that has ever found its way into the Linux kernel. There is a [`posix_spawn()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/posix_spawn.3.html) function, but that is implemented in the C library using `clone()` and `execve()`. 

Arguably, part of the problem is that, while the `clone()`-to-`execve()` pattern is widespread, the details of what happens _between_ those two calls can vary quite a bit. Some files may need to be closed, signal handling changed, scheduling policies tweaked, environment adjusted, and so on; the specific pattern will be different for every case. `posix_spawn()` tries to provide a general mechanism to specify these actions but, as can be seen by looking at the function's argument list, it quickly becomes complex. 

Io_uring, meanwhile, is primarily thought of as a way of performing operations asynchronously. User space can queue operations in a ring buffer; the kernel consumes that buffer, executes the operations asynchronously, then puts the results into another ring buffer (the "completion ring") as each operation completes. Initially, only basic I/O operations were supported, but the list of operations has grown over the years. At this point, io_uring can be thought of as a sort of alternative system-call interface for Linux that is inherently asynchronous. 

An important io_uring feature, for the purposes of implementing something like `posix_spawn()`, is the ability to create chains of linked operations. When the kernel encounters a chain, it will only initiate the first operation; the next operation in the chain will only run after the first completes. The failure of an operation in a chain will normally cause all remaining operations to be canceled, but a "hard link" between two operations will cause execution to continue regardless of the success of the first of the two. Linking operations in this way essentially allows simple programs to be loaded into the kernel for asynchronous execution; these programs can run in parallel with any other io_uring operations that have been submitted. 

The new patch set creates two new io_uring operations, each with some special semantics. The first of those is `IORING_OP_CLONE`, which causes the creation of a new process to execute any operations that follow in the same chain. In a difference from a full `clone()` call, though, much of the calling task's context is unavailable to the process created by `IORING_OP_CLONE`. Without that context, io_uring operations in the newly created process can no longer be asynchronous; every operation in the chain must complete immediately, or the chain will fail. In practice, that means that operations like closing files can be executed, but complicated I/O operations are no longer possible. Krisman hopes to be able to at least partially lift that constraint in the future. 

Once the chain completes, the new process will be terminated, with one important exception: if it invokes the second new operation, `IORING_OP_EXEC`, which performs the equivalent of an `execveat()` call, replacing the running program with a new executable. At this point, the new process is completely detached from the original, is running its own program, and the processing of the io_uring chain is complete; the process will, rather than being terminated, go off to run the new program. Placing any other operations after `IORING_OP_EXEC` in the chain usually makes no sense; any operations after a successful `IORING_OP_EXEC` will be canceled. It also does not make sense to use `IORING_OP_EXEC` in any context other than a new process created with `IORING_OP_CLONE`, so that usage is not allowed. 

There is one case where it can be useful to link operations into the chain after `IORING_OP_EXEC` — efficiently implementing a path search in the kernel. Often, the execution of a new program involves searching for it in a number of directories, usually specified by the `PATH` environment variable. One way of doing this in the io_uring context, as shown in [this test program](/ml/all/20241209234421.4133054-3-krisman@suse.de), is to enqueue a series of `IORING_OP_EXEC` operations, each trying a different location in the path. If hard links are used to chain these operations, execution will continue past failed operations until the one that actually finds the target program succeeds; after that, any subsequent operations will be discarded. The entire search runs in the kernel, without the need to repeatedly switch between kernel and user space. 

Most of the comments on the proposal so far have come from Pavel Begunkov, who has [expressed some concerns](/ml/all/fd219866-b0d3-418b-aee2-f9d1815bfde0@gmail.com) about it. He did not like some aspects of the implementation, the special quirks associated with `IORING_OP_CLONE` and the process it creates, and the use of links, ""which already a bad sign for a bunch of reasons"" (he did not specify what the reasons are). He suggested that io_uring might not be the best place for this functionality; perhaps a list of operations could be passed to a future version of `clone()` instead, mirroring how the `posix_spawn()` interface works. 

Krisman [answered](/ml/all/87wmg3tk7j.fsf@mailhost.krisman.be) that combining everything into a single system call would add complexity while making the solution less flexible. Io_uring makes it easy to put together a set of operations to be run in the kernel in an arbitrary order. The hope is to increase the set of possible operations over time, enabling the implementation of complex logic for the spawning of a new task. It is hard to see how combining all of this functionality into a single system call could work as well. 

In any case, this is early-stage work; getting it to a point where it can be considered for the mainline will require smoothing a number of the rough edges and reducing the number of limitations. It will also certainly require wider review; this work is proposing a significant addition to the kernel's user-space ABI that would have to be supported indefinitely. The developers involved will surely want to get the details right before committing to that support.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [io_uring](/Kernel/Index#io_uring)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
