# Figuring out kernel event reporting [LWN.net]

Robert Love's kernel event notification patch was covered here
last July
.  This patch enables
the reporting of events to interested user-space software, which can then
communicate with the user and generally respond to the events.  As the
Linux desktop projects become more capable and all-encompassing, they need
to know more about what is going on with the system; the events layer is
meant to be the mechanism which makes that information available.
Robert has recently posted
a new
version of the patch
which changes the proposed interface
significantly.  It looks, however, like the patch will change yet again.
As it turns out, there is still a fair amount of uncertainty about how best
to represent and report kernel events.
The initial version of the patch required four pieces of information for
each event: the type (a general class, like "hotplug"), the object
generating the event, the signal (saying what is happening), and an
explanatory string.  The new version eliminates the descriptive string, and
turns the object into a proper kobject, which will be communicated to user
space as its location in sysfs.  This interface is simpler, and it solves
the problem of how to generate predictable and consistent object names, but there are still
questions on how events should really be represented.
The easier part of the discussion has to do with the "type" parameter,
which allows user-space applications to filter out events which will not be
of interest.  Kernel-generated events are expected to be relatively rare,
however, so there will be little cost in simply receiving all of them and
ignoring the uninteresting ones.  So the type value associated with events
may go away.
The more interesting question has to do with the representation of the
"signal" parameter.  That signal is currently a verb, describing something
which has happened with the object of interest.  If the object is a CPU,
the signal might be "
overheating
".  An alternative implementation
would be to replace the signal with an attribute of the object; for a
processor event, the
temperature
attribute would be passed.  User
space would then read the value of that attribute in sysfs to figure out
what is really going on.  This approach would force a structure onto the
signal names, and would point user space to where it needs to go to learn
more about what is going on.  On the other hand, there may not always be
attributes available to describe a given event, and the approach could be
seen as overly restrictive.
Meanwhile, Greg Kroah-Hartman
pointed out
that the simplified
send_kevent()
interface strongly resembles
another, existing kernel interface:
int send_kevent(struct kobject *kobj, const char *signal);
    void kobject_hotplug(const char *action, struct kobject *kobj);
Given that
kobject_hotplug()
is also an event reporting mechanism,
why not unify the two?  The big difference, at this point, would seem to be
that
send_kevent()
uses the netlink interface to communicate with
user space, while the hotplug code runs
/sbin/hotplug
and passes
the relevant information via the environment.  Perhaps the best thing to
do, says Greg, is to have the hotplug code also send a copy of its events
via netlink, and use it for everything?
The idea of sending the same events out by way of two different transports
does not appeal to many developers, however; it seems better to decide
which is best and go with it.  The netlink transport is strongly favored by
the desktop crowd, which dislikes the unpredictable delays and ordering
associated with event handling via
/sbin/hotplug
.  On the other
hand, netlink is not available early in the boot process, but it is
important to be able to handle hotplug events then.
In the end, the hybrid approach may persist for some time.  A future system
might use
/sbin/hotplug
at boot time, then turn it off once
everything is up and running.  The one sure conclusion is that this is an
area in need of further thought and experimentation.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Events reporting
Kernel
kobject_hotplug()/Use in kernel events layer
Kernel
send_kevent()
Kernel
Sysfs/Events layer
to post comments