# The evolution of pipe buffers [LWN.net]

Last week
, this page looked
at the new circular buffer structure used to implement Unix pipes in
2.6.11-rc1, and noted that the plan was to evolve that structure into
something more general.  Since then, Linus has taken a couple more steps;
it must be time to catch up.
One change which has already been merged is the addition of a set of
operations for pipe buffers:
struct pipe_buf_operations {
	int can_merge;
	void *(*map)(struct file *, struct pipe_inode_info *, 
                     struct pipe_buffer *);
	void (*unmap)(struct pipe_inode_info *, struct pipe_buffer *);
	void (*release)(struct pipe_inode_info *, struct pipe_buffer *);
    };
The
can_merge
flag addresses one of the issues raised last week:
coalescing of writes into existing pages in the buffer.  If
can_merge
is non-zero, coalescing will be performed.  Otherwise,
each write to a pipe buffer will result in the creation of a new circular
buffer entry, and, by default, the allocation of a new page.
The
map()
and
unmap()
methods are charged with
controlling the visibility of pipe buffer pages in the kernel's virtual
address space.  The default
map()
operations for buffers
implementing Unix pipes is quite simple:
static void *anon_pipe_buf_map(struct file *file, 
                                   struct pipe_inode_info *info, 
                                   struct pipe_buffer *buf)
    {
            return kmap(buf->page);
    }
Since the mapping operation has been abstracted out, there are now fewer
assumptions regarding how data is really stored within a pipe buffer.  This
opens the door to different pipe implementations, such as pipes which
implement a direct window into device memory.
The
release()
method should clean things up when the pipe buffer
is no longer needed.
Linus has also created
an initial
implementation of a
splice()
system call
, though this work is
clearly not ready for merging at this point.  This system call looks like:
long sys_splice(int fdin, int fdout, size_t len, unsigned long flags);
fdin
and
fdout
are two file descriptors; a call to
sys_splice()
will result in
len
bytes being copied from
fdin
to
fdout
, one of which is expected to be a pipe.
The
flags
argument is not currently used by the sample
implementation.
To make
sys_splice()
work, Linus added two new methods to the
ever-expanding
file_operations
structure:
ssize_t (*splice_write)(struct inode *in_pipe, struct file *out, 
                            size_t len, unsigned long flags);
    ssize_t (*splice_read)(struct file *in, struct inode *out_pipe, 
                           size_t len, unsigned long flags);
The patch includes a generic
splice_read()
implementation suitable
for filesystem-backed file descriptors.  It simply populates the page cache
with some pages from the file, then loads those pages into the pipe buffer
represented by
out_pipe
.  Like ordinary
read()
and
write()
methods, the splice variants can transfer fewer bytes than
requested.  Linus's version will stop at the maximum capacity of a pipe
buffer - 16 pages, currently.
As Linus acknowledges, there are a number of shortcomings to the current
implementation - it is incomplete, the interfaces are ugly, and it will
oops the system if anything goes wrong.  It is, however, an indication of
where he expects this work will lead.  Stay tuned.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Circular buffers
Kernel
Pipes
Kernel
splice()
to post comments