# Some 2.6.11 API changes [LWN.net]

A few small internal API changes have been merged for 2.6.11. For the record, here's what they are. 

The [completion](/Articles/23993/) mechanism allows a thread in the kernel to block until a specific event happens. Three new functions, some of which appear to be aiming for the "longest name in the kernel" prize, have been added: 
    
    
    int wait_for_completion_interruptible(struct completion *c);
    unsigned long wait_for_completion_timeout(struct completion *c,
    	                                  unsigned long timeout);
    unsigned long wait_for_completion_interruptible_timeout(struct completion *c,
                                                            unsigned long timeout);
    

Each of these functions should be relatively straightforward to understand: they add interruptible and timeout variants to the basic `wait_for_completion()` function. They were added it make it easier to convert more semaphore users over to the completion API, which is more appropriate for cases where a one-shot operation is being waited for. This change is another small bit of fallout from the realtime preemption work. 

The kernel has long had an implementation of `bcopy()`: 
    
    
        void bcopy(const char *src, char *dest, int size);
    

Arjan van de Ven and Adrian Bunk recently noticed a couple of things: (1) nothing in the kernel was actually using `bcopy()`, and (2) the implementation was broken. `bcopy()` is supposed to be able to handle overlapping source and destination areas, but, for a number of architectures, the kernel implementation would not do the right thing with such areas. So [a patch](/Articles/120622/) was merged which removes `bcopy()`. No other in-kernel changes were needed, but out-of-tree modules which use `bcopy()` will need to be changed. 

Chip Salzenberg (and others) noticed that a couple of networking functions \- `skb_copy_datagram()` and `sock_alloc_send_pskb()` \- are no longer exported to modules in the 2.6.11 prepatches. This change breaks the out-of-tree VMWare modules. Fixes for VMWare have already been merged. 

On the PCI front, [a patch from Pavel Machek](/Articles/120626/) which changes the prototype of the `suspend()` method in `struct pci_driver` was merged. The new prototype is: 
    
    
        int (*suspend)(struct pci_dev *dev, pm_message_t state);
    

By changing the type of the `state` parameter, the patch allows the removal of some translation code and lets PCI drivers know what is really going on at the higher power management levels. Pavel is [looking for help](/Articles/120633/) in fixing PCI drivers to use the new interface. 

A few spinlock primitives have seen changes. For starters, the macro `rwlock_is_locked()` has been removed. It was never clear whether the macro referred to read or write locking, so Linus dealt with the confusion by just taking it out altogether. Then a new set of primitives was added: 
    
    
        int read_can_lock(rwlock_t *rw);
        int write_can_lock(rwlock_t *rw);
    

These test whether an attempt to obtain a read or write lock at that time would have succeeded. In addition, there is a version for regular spinlocks: 
    
    
        int spin_can_lock(spinlock_t *lock);
    

This function returns a nonzero value if an attempt to obtain `lock` would have succeeded, but does not actually modify the lock. 

Finally, the name of the internal `lock` field in the spinlock structure was renamed to `slock`. This change was made to force the compiler to complain when rwlock primitives are used on a regular spinlock (and vice versa). This sort of type safety could also have been achieved by using inline functions, rather than macros, but some performance problems with `gcc` prevented that approach from being used.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Completions](/Kernel/Index#Completions)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [PCI](/Kernel/Index#PCI)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Spinlocks](/Kernel/Index#Spinlocks)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
