# NETIF_F_LLTX and race conditions [LWN.net]

Network drivers must provide a function (`hard_start_xmit()`) for the networking layer to call whenever it decides the time has come to send out a packet. Normally, calls to `hard_start_xmit()` are serialized with a spinlock (`xmit_lock`) in the `net_device` structure. In this way, the networking subsystem guarantees that it will not attempt to send multiple packets simultaneously on the same interface. 

This method works, but it is not quite ideal, especially for high-performance network adaptors. Most drivers already implement their own internal locking, rendering `xmit_lock` redundant. The `xmit_lock` can also cause a certain amount of cache line bouncing on SMP systems with a lot of networking traffic. To work around these problems, the `NETIF_F_LLTX` "feature" flag was added in 2.6.9. If a driver sets `NETIF_F_LLTX` on its interface, it is declaring that it performs its own locking, and its `hard_start_xmit()` function will be called without the `xmit_lock` held. 

All seemed well for a while, but, back in December, Roland Dreier [noticed a problem](/Articles/121569/). When a network driver notices that an interface's transmit buffers are too full to accept any more packets, it calls `netif_stop_queue()` to inform the networking layer. Its `hard_start_xmit()` method should then not be called until the driver (with a call to `netif_wake_queue()`) indicates that new packets can, once again be accepted. Network drivers thus can count on not being asked to transmit packets when they have stopped the queue. 

Unless, as it turns out, they have set `NETIF_F_LLTX`. The lack of transmit locking in the networking layer itself leads to a situation where `hard_start_xmit()` can be called simultaneously on multiple processors; `hard_start_xmit()` is supposed to handle that situation with its own locking. But, if one `hard_start_xmit()` call fills the transmit buffer and stops the queue, the second call will proceed in a state it had not expected: it has a packet to transmit but no place to put it. In most cases, this race leads to a strange error message in the system logs. In a poorly-written driver, worse things could happen. 

Roland's initial problem report included a patch which silenced the log message. The networking hackers [did not like that solution](/Articles/121581/), however; they feared that it could hide serious (unrelated) bugs. So they set out to come up with a better solution. The result was a lengthy patch which made some significant changes to how network driver locking works. Uses of `xmit_lock` were changed to disable interrupts, so that lock could be used in interrupt handlers as well. Drivers could then use `xmit_lock` (rather than their own lock) for internal locking. The `NETIF_F_LLTX` flag was redefined to indicate that the transmit routine was completely lockless, a condition which only applies to certain types of software device. The end result was most of the advantages of `NETIF_F_LLTX` but with the race condition solved. A version of this patch was merged as part of 2.6.11-rc2. 

Unfortunately, there were some difficulties. The locking changes led to deadlocks in certain situations where the driver would try to grab a lock already held by the networking code which called it. Network drivers had to be careful not to do anything (such as `spin_unlock_irq()`) which would enable interrupts while `xmit_lock` was held. `dev_kfree_skb()` could no longer be called in any place where `xmit_lock` was held, since its use is not legal when interrupts are disabled. Overall, there were enough problems with this approach that the patch was backed out after the -rc2 release, and the developers started over. 

The current approach, as [proposed](/Articles/121585/) by David Miller, is to leave things as they are and silence the log message. The patch has been tweaked a bit since first proposed by Roland in December; it now tries to distinguish the `NETIF_F_LLTX` race from other (more serious) calls to `hard_start_xmit()` with the transmit buffer full. This is done by checking to see if the queue has been stopped; if so, it is a harmless race and transmission of the packet is silently deferred. If the queue is still running, however, then something has gone wrong somewhere. This change must be made in all drivers which use `NETIF_F_LLTX` \- a relatively small set. It's a small change, but it is a change in the rules for network drivers and worth being aware of.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Device drivers](/Kernel/Index#Device_drivers)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [NETIF_F_LLTX](/Kernel/Index#NETIF_F_LLTX)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Networking/hard_start_xmit() locking](/Kernel/Index#Networking-hard_start_xmit_locking)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Race conditions](/Kernel/Index#Race_conditions)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
