# CFQ v3 [LWN.net]

Jens Axboe's completely fair queueing (CFQ) I/O scheduler has been regarded by many as the best available in the 2.6 kernel for a while. Said scheduler has just been through another major upgrade which should implement a higher degree of fairness while providing "excellent" throughput for the system as a whole. 

One of the big additions this time around is time sharing: processes now get time slices during which they are able to dispatch I/O requests. The scheduler will allow a drive to go idle - briefly - during a process's time slice to give that process an opportunity to generate more I/O requests. In this way, it behaves similarly to the anticipatory scheduler; it allows the process to get the most out of its slice while, hopefully, taking advantage of the locality of that process's requests. If, however, a process's requests end up causing too much seeking, that process will temporarily lose its right to hold the disk idle. 

Tied in with the time sharing implementation is the notion of I/O priorities. Each process has its own I/O priority, which, by default, is derived from its CPU priority. Processes with higher priorities will preempt lower-priority processes, while sharing the drive in a round-robin fashion with equal-priority processes. There is also a realtime priority level which does not do round-robin sharing, and an "idle" level which is only allowed to dispatch requests when the drive has been idle for a sufficiently long period. 

There is a temporary priority boosting mechanism designed to avoid priority inversion problems when a low-priority process holds important resources. 

Two new system calls have been added for working with I/O priorities: 
    
    
        int ioprio_set(int which, int who, int priority);
        int ioprio_get(int which, int who);
    

Here, `which` controls whether the call applies to a single process, process group, or user, and `who` is the appropriate ID (usually the process ID). A call to `ioprio_set()` will apply the new `priority` (subject to the usual permissions checks) while `ioprio_get()` returns the current value.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Block layer/I/O scheduling](/Kernel/Index#Block_layer-IO_scheduling)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [CFQ I/O scheduler](/Kernel/Index#CFQ_IO_scheduler)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
