# The 2005 Linux Kernel Developers' Summit [LWN.net]

The 2005 version of the invitation-only Linux Kernel Developers' Summit was held on July 18 and 19 in Ottawa. The following are LWN editor Jonathan Corbet's notes from the discussion. 

July 18 sessions: 

  * [The processor panel](/Articles/144098/), being a discussion between the kernel developers and processor architects from AMD, IBM, and Intel. 

  * [I/O Buses](/Articles/144100/), and I/O memory management units in particular. 

  * [Virtual memory topics](/Articles/144102/), including fragmentation, response to memory pressure, and scalability. 

  * [ExecShield](/Articles/144107/); Red Hat's security patches which have only partially been merged into the mainline. 

  * [Virtualization](/Articles/144109/), and how the kernel can better support it. 

  * [The virtual filesystem](/Articles/144110/), and various topics related to the VFS. 




July 19 (Tuesday) sessions: [![\[Linus Torvalds\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/conf/ols+ks2005/linus-fun-sm.jpg)](/Articles/144276/)

  * [The hardware vendors' panel](/Articles/144269/), on the impedance mismatch between the kernel development community and manufacturers. 

  * [Report from the networking summit](/Articles/144272/) which was held before the kernel event. 

  * [The convergence of storage and network paths](/Articles/144273/); how do you ensure safe operation when distinction between the networking and block subsystems blurs? 

  * [Clustering](/Articles/144274/): a brief report from the clustering summit held two weeks before in Germany. 

  * [RAS tools](/Articles/144277/), being mostly a discussion of the recently merged kexec and kdump capabilities. 

  * [Realtime capabilities](/Articles/144278/), a look at the various proposals for implementing realtime response with Linux. 

  * [The kernel and the Linux desktop](/Articles/144279/); a report from the Desktop Developers' Conference. 

  * [A report from the power management summit](/Articles/144193/), contributed by Pat Mochel. Pat also led the session at the Kernel Summit on power management. The one thing that session added which is not in Pat's report: Linus took the power management developers to task for focusing on suspend-to-disk capabilities, when, he says, what everybody wants is suspend-to-RAM. The latter is complicated, however, by the usual video adapter difficulties. 

  * [The kernel development process](/Articles/144281/), with an emphasis on how the community could produce kernels with fewer bugs. 




![\[Kernel summit group\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/conf/ols+ks2005/kernel-group-512.jpg)

The group photo is available in [medium resolution (1024 pixels)](/Articles/144282/) and [full resolution (3072 pixels)](/Articles/144284/) formats.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Kernel Summit](/Kernel/Index#Kernel_Summit)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Kernel Summit/2005](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Kernel_Summit-2005)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
