# Tweaks to madvise() and posix_fadvise() [LWN.net]

A couple of Linux-specific additions to the memory-related system call API have recently found their way into the -mm tree. There is a bit of pressure to get them into 2.6.16, though that may be unlikely at this late date. This may be a good time to look at the proposed changes, however, along with the pressures which motivated them. 

Prepare yourself, as your editor is about to inflict his primitive drawing skills upon the world again. Consider a situation which, with some ![\[Diagram\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/ns/kernel/mlock.png) imagination, could be described by the diagram to the right. A process has a particular memory page of interest, pointed to by a page table entry. That process has arranged with a device driver to exchange data through this page; as a result, the driver has a pointer to the associated `page` structure, possibly obtained with `get_user_pages()`. At this stage, all is working well. 

But then the process decides to reproduce. The resulting call to `fork()` has a number of consequences beyond the creation of a child process. That call will attempt to avoid copying the parent process's ![\[Diagram\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/ns/kernel/mlock2.png) memory since, for much of the memory range, there is unlikely to ever be a reason to do so. Instead, both parent and child will be set up with page table entries pointing to the same physical page in memory, but that page will now be write protected. As long as neither process attempts to write to the page, the situation can remain as shown in the diagram to the left. Both processes - and the driver - can share the same physical page. If either process calls `fork()` again, the result will be a third process also sharing that page, and so on. Often, no process will attempt to write to the page for as long as it is in this shared state, and no copy will ever have to be performed. 

Life is not always so easy, however. If the parent process makes a change to the page - writing some new data to be passed through to the driver, for example - the hardware will trap the write attempt. The kernel will respond by allocating a new page, copying the old page's contents there, ![\[Diagram\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/ns/kernel/mlock3.png) and pointing the parent process's page table entry to the new, write-enabled page. At that point, the write attempt can go forward, and everybody will be happy. 

Or maybe not. The copy-on-write operation described above will break the parent process's connection with the old page. But there is no way to inform the driver of that change. The result will be the situation shown on the right: the driver retains a reference to the page which now belongs exclusively to the child process(es). The parent process and the driver will no longer be able to communicate with each other. Additionally, if the parent had used `mlock()` to lock the original page into memory, that lock, too, will remain with the original page. The page which the parent had thought was pinned into RAM will become pageable, with potentially bad effects on performance and security. 

One could try to address this problem by changing the copy-on-write logic to always maintain the connection between the parent process and its original pages. That would require the COW code to find any other processes with references to the page, however, and assign the copied page to them. That change would slow the code and invite interesting race conditions, however; remember that there could be a large number of other processes with references to the page. So the [solution](/Articles/171956/) proposed by Michael Tsirkin takes a different approach. 

If a process has pages which it has locked into memory or set up to be shared with a device driver, chances are that it never wants its children to have access to that memory in the first place. So Michael's patch adds a couple of new flags to the `madvise()` system call. A process with special memory can call `madvise()` with the new `MADV_DONTFORK` flag; the kernel will respond by setting the `VM_DONTCOPY` flag in the associated virtual memory area structure; thereafter, any newly-created child process simply will not see that part of the address space. There is also a `MADV_DOFORK` flag which cancels the effect of `MADV_DONTFORK`. 

Meanwhile, another change found in current -mm came as a result of [this complaint](/Articles/171971/) about the behavior of the `msync()` system call, which is used to flush modified parts of a memory-mapped file back to disk. In particular, the complainer, whose real name is unclear, just noticed that `msync()` changed its semantics between 2.4 and 2.6. In the 2.4 kernel, a call to `msync(..., MS_ASYNC)` would mark the indicated memory range as being dirty and begin the process of writing those pages to disk. In 2.6, instead, no I/O is started directly from `msync()`; instead, the pages will remain dirty in the page cache until the virtual memory subsystem gets around to flushing them out. 

The original complainer asked that the old behavior be restored, but that seems unlikely to happen. For most workloads, the best performance is achieved by letting the kernel decide just when to write each part of the file back to disk. But there was also some recognition that an option to start I/O immediately (without necessarily waiting for it) would be a useful thing in some situations. The answer, as [implemented](/Articles/171976/) by Andrew Morton, leaves the `msync()` call alone, however; instead, Andrew has added a couple of new options to the `posix_fadvise()` system call: 

  * `LINUX_FADV_ASYNC_WRITE` will start write I/O on the given range of pages. If some of those pages are already under I/O, the operation will not be restarted, leaving open the possibility that late changes might not make it to disk. 

  * `LINUX_FADV_WRITE_WAIT` will wait for any I/O currently in progress on the given range of pages, but does not actually start any I/O. 




In practice, these calls will often need to be made in combinations. An application which needs to assure itself that all modified pages are on disk must first perform a wait call (thus ensuring that all pages under I/O are written), a write call (to start I/O on remaining dirty pages), and a second wait call (to allow that I/O to complete). But any application wanting the 2.4 `msync()` behavior can get it with a single `LINUX_FADV_ASYNC_WRITE` call. 

Chances are good that both of these changes could land in the mainline in the 2.6.17 time frame.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Memory management](/Kernel/Index#Memory_management)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [posix_fadvise()](/Kernel/Index#posix_fadvise)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
