# Containers and lightweight virtualization [LWN.net]

"Virtualization" is the act of making a set of processes believe that it has a dedicated system to itself. There are a number of approaches being taken to the virtualization problem, with Xen, VMWare, and User-mode Linux being some of the better-known options. Those are relatively heavy-weight solutions, however, with a separate kernel being run for each virtual machine. Often, that is exactly the right solution to the problem; running independent kernels gives strong separation between environments and enables the running of multiple operating systems on the same hardware. 

Full virtualization and paravirtualization are not the only approaches being taken, however. An alternative is lightweight virtualization, generally based on some sort of container concept. With containers, a group of processes still appears to have its own dedicated system, but it is really running in a specially isolated environment. All containers run on top of the same kernel. With containers, the ability to run different operating systems is lost, as is the strong separation between virtual systems. Thus, one might not want to give root access to processes running within a container environment. On the other hand, containers can have considerable performance advantages, enabling large numbers of them to run on the same physical host. 

There is no shortage of container-oriented projects. These include relatively simple efforts like the [BSD jail module](http://lwn.net/Articles/120752/) through more thorough efforts like [Linux-VServer](http://linux-vserver.org/), [OpenVZ](http://openvz.org/), and the proprietary [Virtuozzo](http://www.virtuozzo.com/) (based on OpenVZ) offering. Many of these projects would like to get at least some of their code into the kernel and shed the load of carrying out-of-tree patches. There is little interest, however, in merging code which only supports some of these projects. The container people are going to have to get together and work out some common solutions which they can all use. 

It appears that this is exactly what the container developers are doing. A [loose agreement](/Articles/179368/) has been put in place wherein developers from a few projects will discuss proposed changes and jointly work them into a form where they meet everybody's needs. Once a particular patch has reached a point where all of the developers are willing to sign off on it, it can be forwarded for eventual merging into the mainline. 

The more complex and intrusive changes, such as [PID virtualization](http://lwn.net/Articles/171017/), appear to be on hold for now. Instead, it looks like the first jointly-agreed patch might be the [UTS namespace](http://lwn.net/Articles/179345/) virtualization patch. The aim of the patch is relatively straightforward: it allows each container (as represented by a family tree of processes) to have its own version of the `utsname` structure, which holds the node name, domain name, operating system version, and a few other things. In essence, it replaces a single global structure with multiple structures attached at various places in the process tree. It still requires a five-part patch, with every reference to the global `system_utsname` structure replaced by a call to the new `utsname()` function. 

Longer-range plans call for the virtualization of every global namespace in the kernel, including SYSV IPC, process IDs, and even netfilter rules. There was an interesting discussion on the virtualization of security modules; some think that each container should be able to load its own security policy, while others argue in favor of a single system security policy which is aware of (and able to use) containers. Unsurprisingly, SELinux is already equipped with a type hierarchy mechanism which can be used with containers in the single-policy approach. 

Containers might still prove to be a hard sell with some developers, who will see them as complicating access to many internal kernel data structures without adding a whole lot of value. It is clear, however, that there is a demand for this sort of lightweight virtualization - OpenVZ, alone, [claims](/Articles/179395/) to be running over 300,000 virtual environments. So the pressure to standardize this code and move it into the mainline will only grow over time. Once they are clean enough to satisfy the development community, pieces of the container concept are likely to be merged.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Containers](/Kernel/Index#Containers)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Virtualization/Containers](/Kernel/Index#Virtualization-Containers)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
