# The 2006 Linux Kernel Summit [LWN.net]

![\[Group photo\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/conf/ols+ks2006/group-sm.jpg)  
---  
The group photo is available in [medium](/Articles/191841/) and [high](/Articles/191842/) resolution.   
  
The 2006 Linux Kernel Summit was scheduled for its traditional time: the two days prior to the opening of the Ottawa Linux Symposium. Also following tradition, LWN editor Jonathan Corbet, a member of the Summit program committee, was there and taking notes. 

### Day 1: July 17

Discussions held during the first day of the Kernel Summit include: 

  * [The processor panel](/Articles/191651/), wherein three vendors discuss their future product plans with the kernel developers. 

  * [Mini-summit summaries](/Articles/191652/): updates from the storage, wireless networking, filesystems, memory management, and power management mini-summits. 

  * [Kernel quality and development process](/Articles/191650/). Andrew Morton looks into whether the kernel really has a quality problem, and at ways to improve the way the kernel is developed. 

  * [The `ioctl()` interface](/Articles/191653/), dedicated to the proposition that this much-criticized system call is not always evil. 

  * [The kernel ABI](/Articles/191654), how to avoid breaking it, and how to best maintain tools which are tightly coupled to the kernel. 

  * [Software suspend](/Articles/191657/), what it will take to make it work reliably, and whether user-space software suspend is a good idea. 

  * [Documentation](/Articles/191659/): the current state of affairs and what can be done to improve it. 




### Day 2: July 18

The second and final day of the kernel summit included these sessions: 

  * [Realtime](http://lwn.net/Articles/191782/): the state of the realtime patches. 

  * [Embedded systems](http://lwn.net/Articles/191822/) and what is required to better support them. 

  * [Security](http://lwn.net/Articles/191737/); in particular, the fate of AppArmor and the Linux Security Modules framework. 

  * [Paravirtualization and containers](/Articles/191923/) and how to make multiple virtualization solutions work in one kernel code base. 

  * [Automated testing: work being done to catch kernel bugs before they affect users. 
  * [The VFS layer](/Articles/191926/). 
  * [Scalability](/Articles/191929/): how big can Linux go? 
  * [DMA and IOMMU issues](/Articles/191931/). 
  * [Development process II](/Articles/191932/); a final look at the process and the conclusion of the summit. ](http://lwn.net/Articles/191924/)




In summary: in your editor's opinion, this was one of the more successful kernel summits. The discussions were energetic and interesting, the topics covered were relevant, and some real decisions were made. While there are always improvements which can be made, it seems that the kernel process is functioning well and the developers are, for the most part, working well together. Things are going relatively smoothly, so the summit did as well.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Kernel Summit](/Kernel/Index#Kernel_Summit)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Kernel Summit/2006](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Kernel_Summit-2006)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
