# 2.6 and the user-space ABI [LWN.net]

The 2.6.22-rc1 kernel is out, and the reports of regressions are beginning to trickle in. A couple of those involve user-space binary interface changes: one in the video4linux2 interface and one in the i2c code (which affects hardware monitoring utilities). The V4L2 regression involves a change made to a structure passed to and from user space; chances are good that it will be reverted before the final 2.6.22 kernel comes out. For the time being, the i2c problem is "fixed" by upgrading to version 2.10.3 of the lm_sensors package. 

Linus [isn't happy](/Articles/234358/) about the forced lm_sensors upgrade; he has asked for a way to avoid that requirement. In response, i2c maintainer Jean Delvare [raised some misgivings](/Articles/234359/) about the stable ABI policy: 

While I'm all for keeping things relatively stable and not asking the user to constantly upgrade user-space, I believe that we just can't promise to never break user-level interfaces while keeping the development pace we have right now. We can promise to grant people significant delay before we drop compatibility options, but "forever" doesn't scale. 

Those comments notwithstanding, Linux has managed to maintain user-space ABI compatibility quite nicely for many years. There are certainly exceptions, but they are few enough and far enough between that each one stands out. But, as [Christoph Hellwig points out](/Articles/234364/), the situation is not perfect: 

Except for very rare case (modules support comes to mine) syscall compatibility works perfectly. But that's because syscalls are a very visible ABI and people don't break them by accident. They also don't decide they have a cool new scheme all syscalls need to follow now. 

Now compare that to sysfs.. 

The user-space ABI now goes well beyond system calls. The huge sysfs interface (4800 files on your editor's desktop) is a big piece of user space's view of the system, and it is a piece which is difficult to avoid breaking. Directories in sysfs correspond directly to data structures within the kernel; changes to those structures will often have consequences in sysfs. So kernel developers may think that they are operating far away from the user-space interface, but end up breaking it anyway. Netlink, `/proc`, and `ioctl()` also make up part of the ABI, and they, too, can be easy to break. The V4L2 regression is the result of an attempt to extend one `ioctl()` call breaking others. 

The new development model can also make it harder to maintain compatibility. Four or five major releases per year, each with a full load of new major features, adds up to a lot of code changes. There is also no clear point where whatever changes _do_ prove to be unavoidable can be made without surprising users. If the kernel developers were to disappear for a year or two and return with a 3.0 release, nobody would be surprised if it required a small amount of adaptation on the user-space side. But a 2.6.22 release - which contains needed fixes and new drivers along with new features - is not expected to break working systems. 

Arguments for returning to the older development model are hard to find, though. Despite occasional glitches, things are generally working far better than they did before 2.6 came out. The pace of development is unlikely to slow. So the problem of occasional ABI regressions is likely to remain with us. As is often the case, the best way to avoid such problems - after a high degree of attention by the developers - is extensive testing. User-space ABI changes caught during the development cycle will almost certainly not survive into the final release, but it is hard to fix problems that nobody knows about. As is also often the case, automating this testing is hard; nobody can put together all of the hardware and software combinations that the kernel will face. So the worthy cause of maintaining a stable user-space interface is likely to require a fair amount of human attention for the foreseeable future.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/User-space ABI](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-User-space_ABI)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
