# btrfs and NILFS [LWN.net]

Almost exactly one year ago, as the developers were discussing changes to
the venerable ext3 filesystem, Andrew Morton was
heard to say
:
All that being said, Linux's filesystems are looking increasingly
	crufty and we are getting to the time where we would benefit from a
	greenfield start-a-new-one.  That new one might even be based on
	reiser4 - has anyone looked?  It's been sitting around for a couple
	of years.
Reiser4 looks like it may continue to sit around for a while yet.  But that
does not mean that there is no interest in the creation of interesting new
filesystems.  LogFS was
discussed
here
in May, but it's not the only newcomer in the filesystem arena.
The most interesting new contender, perhaps, is btrfs, which was
announced
by Chris Mason on
June 12.  It is an entirely new filesystem intended for standard
rotating storage with a number of interesting features.  These include:
Btrfs is a fully extent-based filesystem, meaning that it can store 
     large files far more efficiently than ext3 (the in-development ext4
     filesystem has extent support).  An extent-based filesystem does away
     with the long lists of pointers to the individual blocks contained
     within a file; instead, groups of contiguous blocks ("extents") are
     tracked together.  The result is far less metadata overhead,
     especially with large files.  For very small files, btrfs will store
     the file contents themselves within the extent structure, eliminating
     the need for a separate block allocation.
Filesystems can be split into "subvolumes," each of which has its own
     directory structure and disk quota.  Subvolumes can be used to
     subdivide a btrfs filesystem, but there is another interesting use of
     them...
Btrfs can do snapshotting - freezing the state of the filesystem at
     any given time.  Snapshots are just subvolumes; they become a
     separate, independent directory tree which can be navigated
     independently from the "live" filesystem.  Interestingly, though,
     btrfs snapshots are also live, and can be modified after being taken
     and snapshotted as well.
Supporting subvolumes and snapshots forces a copy-on-write structure
     onto btrfs.  If a given extent is written to, it will be copied and
     the new data written to the copy.  Extents have reference counts;
     creating a snapshot, for example, will cause reference counts to be
     incremented.  When an extent contained in both a snapshot and the "real"
     filesystem is modified, it will be copied for whatever subvolume is
     being changed but will remain in place, unchanged in the other.  If
     the snapshot is eventually removed, all associated reference counts
     will be decremented and any unused extents will be reclaimed.
The subvolume and snapshot mechanism eliminates the need for a
     separate journaling feature.  Changes to the filesystem can be made
     transactional simply by taking a snapshot which only lasts until the
     transaction completes.
This filesystem checksums everything - data and metadata both.  As a
     result, it is able to detect many types of filesystem corruption on
     the fly.
Fast filesystem checking is also an important design goal for btrfs.  The
data and metadata are laid out in a way that allows the offline filesystem
checker to read the disk in a nearly sequential manner.  That should speed
the process considerably; filesystem checking usually involves vast numbers
of seek operations.  Online filesystem checking is also in the plans,
though it has not been implemented yet; once it is working, this feature
could eliminate the need for separate, mount-time filesystem checks
entirely.
This filesystem is in a very early state - not recommended for data which
one might actually want to keep.  There's not been a whole lot of
benchmarking done, and, presumably, a lot of optimization work still to
happen.  For example, the entire filesystem is currently protected by a
single mutex, a solution which is unlikely to perform well on those
leading-edge 4096-processor systems.  Little details - like not oopsing
when the filesystem runs out of space, direct I/O, writing via
mmap()
, extended attributes, asynchronous I/O, and more - have yet
to be taken care of.  But btrfs has garnered a considerable amount of
interest; if it lives up to its initial promise we could find ourselves
using btrfs-based systems in the future.
(For more information, see
the btrfs project page
).
Another recently-announced filesystem is
NILFS
, which is now at
version 2.0.  NILFS is a log-structured filesystem, in that the
storage medium is treated like a circular buffer and new blocks are always
written to the end.  These filesystems tend to do very well on benchmarks
which measure write performance, since all writes go to a contiguous set of
blocks; read performance is not always quite as good.  Log-structured
filesystems are often used for flash media since they will naturally
perform wear-leveling; it would appear, however, that NILFS is not aimed at
flash devices.
Instead, NILFS emphasizes snapshots.  The log-structured approach is a
specific form of copy-on-write behavior, so it naturally lends itself to
the creation of filesystem snapshots.  The NILFS developers
talk
about the creation of "continuous
snapshots" which can be used to recover from user-initiated filesystem
problems - those of the "
rm -r
" variety.  NILFS claims
scalability through 64-bit data structures, but, interestingly, support for
the x86_64 architecture remains on the "TODO list."  The filesystem  does
not yet have support for extents.
More information on NILFS can be found on
nilfs.org
.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Btrfs
Kernel
Filesystems/Btrfs
Kernel
NILFS
to post comments