# More quotes of the week - scenes from a flame war [LWN.net]

As it turns out, there is very little from the recent, 1000-message GPLv3 flame war that justified the expenditure of so many bits. For those who haven't gotten around to reading the whole thing, here's a few selections. 

I think that the Open Source community (and the FSF too) is much better off *not* concentrating so much on "legal rules" of what can and cannot be done, and instead spend much more effort on showing people why the whole "Open Source" thing actually works. And in fact, I think that's _exactly_ what Linux has been doing for the last decade! 

\-- [Linus Torvalds](/Articles/238971/)

But if by the question you mean "would you think the GPLv3 is fine without the new language in section 6 about the 'consumer devices'", then the answer is that yes, I think that the current GPLv3 draft looks fine apart from that. 

\-- [Linus Torvalds](/Articles/238973/)

I don't see how you can claim that the vendor is infringing on your freedom, _you_ made the decision to go out and buy the product knowing that the vendor wasn't going to go out of their way to help you hack the device. In many cases the vendor doesn't even have the option (802.11b channels and certification come to mind, GSM, etc.) of opening things up to the end user, and making changes to the license isn't going to magically change any of this. 

\-- [Paul Mundt](/Articles/238970/)

I see a lot more prohibitions than freedoms in what TiVo does. I don't understand why you'd stand up for it. Is it more important that a single company be allowed to impose prohibitions on others in order for its business model to work, than to maintain the spirit of hacking and sharing that enabled Free Software and Linux to flourish? Do you expect Linux would have flourished if computers had locks that stopped people from modifying Linux in them? 

\-- [Alexandre Oliva](/Articles/238978/)

So instead of thinking of Tivo as something "evil", I think of Tivo as the working bee who will never pass on its genes, but it actually ended up helping the people who *do* pass on their genes: the kernel (to a small degree - not so much because of the patches themselves, as the *mindshare* in the PVR space) and projects like MythTV (again, not so much because of any patches, but because it helped grow peoples understanding of the problem space!). 

\-- [Linus Torvalds](/Articles/238975/)

I believe RMS should accept the fact that most of that code was written without people having bought into his ideology, and he should accept _responsibility_ for the power he has acquired by genius or by accident (your choice) and he should try to _understand_ how those people tick - instead of trying to further his own personal agenda. 

\-- [Ingo Molnar](/Articles/238974/)

I beg to differ. By adopting _his_ license you adopted his view. If you don't like that then choose a different license (which obviously you are free to do). 

\-- [Michael Gerdau](/Articles/238976/)

The GPLv2 does not state that you have to become a slave of rms and follow him in all things, and agree with him. Really. You must have read some other (perhaps unreleased early draft?) version. 

\-- [Linus Torvalds](/Articles/238979/)

What the fsck it is, linux-kernel or bleeding Council of Nikea? 

\-- [Al Viro](/Articles/238972/)  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Copyright issues](/Kernel/Index#Copyright_issues)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
