# Merged for 2.6.23 [LWN.net]

Some 2600 changesets have been merged into the mainline kernel
repository since
last week's
summary
.  The shape of 2.6.23 is now becoming clearer; this kernel will
include:
New drivers for Dallas DS1682 elapsed time recorder chips, PMC-Sierra
     MSP71xx i2c controllers, Renesas M66592 USB peripheral controllers,
     Renesas R8A66597 USB host controllers, OTi-6858 USB-to-RS232 bridge
     controllers, Samsung S3C24xx SoC USB device controllers, Intel iop32x,
     iop33x, and iop13xx DMA engines, Xilinx SystemACE compact flash
     interfaces, BCM1250 dual UART devices, OMAP24xx multichannel SPI
     controllers, Atmel AVR32 AT32AP700x real-time clocks, ST M41T80 and ST
     M48T59 real-time clocks, Dallas DS1216 real-time clocks, TI OMAP
     framebuffers, display controllers, and LCD controllers (along with a
     support for a number of panels), Atmel AT32AP700X watchdog devices,
     IBM z/VM virtual card readers and punches, Afatech AF9005
     demodulators.
After years of work, the core Xen i386 implementation has been
     merged.  Xen is finally a part of the mainline kernel.  (Anybody who
     is tempted to believe that predictions found in LWN are worth anything
     may be amused by
Dave Jones
     poking fun
at a suggestion, published in 2004, that Xen could be
     merged sometime soon).
The
fallocate()
system call has been merged, but without the deallocation options.
The developmental ext4 filesystem has gained a number of new features,
     including
fallocate()
support, nanosecond timestamps, and
     support for directories containing more than 65,000 other directories.
The new "macvlan" driver allows the system administrator to create
     virtual interfaces mapped to and from specific MAC addresses.
A number of virtual drivers for Sun logical domains (on the SPARC64
     architecture) have been added.  LDOM CPU hotplug support has also been
     added.
The bsg code - a new generic SCSI device driver based on the block
     layer - has been merged.
IPV4 multipath cached routing support has been dropped; this code
     never did work very well, and never got out of the experimental
     state.
Basic, experimental support for PPP over L2TP sockets has been added.
A device model extension (marked experimental) can export a laptop's
     desktop management information (DMI) data through sysfs.  This will
     allow distributors to load just the drivers needed for a specific
     laptop instead of the "load them all and let the hardware sort them
     out" technique which is often used now.
The highly experimental "USB persist" feature attempts to maintain the
     state of USB devices when they lose power.  The driving motivation
     between this patch is to be able to suspend a system containing
     filesystems on USB storage and still have those filesystems mounted
     and working at resume time.
As scheduled, the speedstep-centrino CPU governor has been removed in
     favor of the acpi-cpufreq code.
The XFS filesystem now has a "stream of files" concept which allows it
     to place related files (a series of frames in a video stream, for
     example) contiguously on disk.
The AFS filesystem now has file locking support.
The raw block driver has been un-deprecated since it appears it will
     not be going away anytime soon.
The
O_CLOEXEC
open flag has been added.
There is a new
clone()
flag -
CLONE_NEWUSER
- which
     creates a new user namespace for the process; it is intended for use
     with container systems.
The long-debated
memory
     fragmentation avoidance
patches have been merged at last; the
     associated
lumpy reclaim
code has been merged as well.
The kernel virtual machine (KVM) code can now support SMP guests.
Changes visible to kernel developers include:
Much of the x86 startup code has been rewritten in C.  There should be
     little in the way of changes for anybody who does not actually get
     into the code, but, for those folks, the new version should be much
     easier to work with.
There is a new rtnetlink API for managing software network devices.
The networking core can now work with devices which have more than one
     transmit queue.  This is a feature which was needed to properly
     support some wireless devices.
The sysfs core has been significantly rewritten to weaken the
     connection between sysfs entries and internal kobjects.  The new code
     should make life easier for driver writers who will have fewer object
     lifecycle issues to worry about.
The never-used
enable_wake()
PCI driver method has been
     removed.
Drivers wanting to get the revision ID from the PCI config space
     should now just use the value found in the new
revision
member of the
pci_dev
structure.  All in-tree drivers have
     been changed to use this new approach.
The SCSI layer has picked up a couple of scatter/gather accessor
     functions -
scsi_dma_map()
and
scsi_dma_unmap()
- in
     preparation for chained scatter/gather lists and bidirectional
     requests.  Most drivers in the kernel have been updated to use these
     functions.
The idr code has a couple of new helper functions:
idr_for_each()
and
idr_remove_all()
.
Much of the kernel build system has been converted over to
     "menuconfig" objects, making it easy to turn whole groups of options
     on or off at once.
sys_ioctl()
is no longer exported to modules.
The page table helper functions
ptep_establish()
,
ptep_test_and_clear_dirty()
and
ptep_clear_flush_dirty()
have been removed - they had no
     in-kernel users.
Kernel threads are non-freezable by default; any kernel thread which
     should be frozen for a suspend-to-disk operation must now call
set_freezable()
to arrange for that to happen.
The SLUB allocator is now the default.
The new function
is_owner_or_cap(inode)
tests for access
     permission based on the current fsuid and capabilities; it replaces
     the open-coded test previously found in several filesystems.
There is a new utility function:
char *kstrndup(const char *s, size_t max, gfp_t gfp);
This function duplicates a string along the lines of the user-space
strndup()
.
It's worth noting a couple of things which will
not
be in 2.6.23.
The first is the
process
containers
patch, which is not quite considered to be ready yet.  Some
other features (notably CFS group scheduling) are waiting for process
containers, so chances are good that this code will be in shape for merging
by 2.6.24.
The other big omission is the x86_64 clockevents, dynamic tick, and high-resolution timers
code.  This patch is considered by its authors to be ready (and your editor
has been running it without ill effect), but, after the troubles caused by
the integration of the i386 version of this code in 2.6.21, there is a
desire felt by some developers to go a bit more slowly and carefully.  The
result was a somewhat unhappy discussion on the mailing lists and a plan to
better split these patches so they can be carefully reviewed for the next
development cycle.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Releases/2.6.23
to post comments