# fault() [LWN.net]

Back in October, 2006, LWN [covered the proposed `fault()` method](http://lwn.net/Articles/203725/) for virtual memory areas. This API change was put forward as part of a fix for an obscure (but real) race condition within the kernel. Such a fix would seem important, but, even so, it took the better part of a year for `fault()` to make it into the mainline. Now that the patch has been merged for 2.6.23, it is worth taking a look at the API which was adopted. 

A virtual memory area (VMA) in the kernel represents a piece of a process's virtual address space. Each VMA is mapped in its own way; most VMAs are mapped to files on the disk, but there are also anonymous VMAs (mapped to swap space, for all practical purposes), device memory mappings, and more. Each VMA must provide a handler for situations where a specific page in that VMA is not resident in main memory; the handler must rectify the situation or let the kernel know that it cannot be done. In most cases, the `nopfn()` or older (but more heavily used) `nopage()` methods fill that bill. They are called with the offset of the missing page within the VMA and are expected to return a pointer to the `page` structure for the missing page. For more complicated cases, nonlinear VMAs in particular, the `populate()` method is invoked instead. 

The existence of three functions to perform the same task suggests that requirements have changed over time and that a cleanup is overdue. When none of those interfaces are able to be extended to prevent a race condition, the pressure for a new approach can only get stronger. That new approach, as created by Nick Piggin, is the `fault()` method, which should, eventually, replace all three of the others. The prototype for `fault()` is: 
    
    
        int (*fault)(struct vm_area_struct *vma, struct vm_fault *vmf);
    

Most of the information of interest can be found in the new `vm_fault` structure, which looks like this: 
    
    
        struct vm_fault {
    	unsigned int flags;
    	pgoff_t pgoff;
    	void __user *virtual_address;
    	struct page *page;
        };
    

The `fault()` method should, like its predecessors, arrange for the missing page to exist and return its address to the kernel. The interface used is rather more flexible, though. 

The offset of the missing page can be found in the `pgoff` field. Fault handlers can also find the corresponding user-space address in `virtual_address`, but anybody who is tempted to use that field should be prepared to justify that use to a crowd of skeptical kernel developers. Most handlers should not care where the page lives in user space, and use of `virtual_address` will make it impossible to support nonlinear VMAs. So, if at all possible, `virtual_address` should be ignored. If your code only uses `pgoff`, it should also set the `VM_CAN_NONLINEAR` flag in the VMA's `vm_flags` field to let the kernel know that it is playing by the rules. 

The `flags` field has two possible flags: 

  * `FAULT_FLAG_WRITE` indicates that the page fault happened on a write access. 

  * `FAULT_FLAG_NONLINEAR` says that the given VMA is a nonlinear mapping. 




After `fault()` has done its work, it should store a pointer to the `page` structure for the faulted-in page in the `page` field \- but see below for an exception. The return value from `fault()` is a set of flags which can indicate a number of things: 

  * `VM_FAULT_OOM`: the fault could not be handled because the handler was unable to allocate the required memory. 

  * `VM_FAULT_SIGBUS`: the page offset is out of range, so the fault could not be handled. 

  * `VM_FAULT_MAJOR`: marks a "major" page fault - usually one which required reading data from disk. 

  * `VM_FAULT_WRITE`: a copy-on-write mapping was broken to satisfy the fault. 

  * `VM_FAULT_NOPAGE`: set if the handler has installed the page table entry directly. In this case, the `page` field returned in the `vm_fault` structure has no meaning. Among other uses, this flag allows `fault()` to be used with mappings that have no associated `page` structures - mappings of device memory, for example. 

  * `VM_FAULT_LOCKED`: the returned page has been locked by the handler and should be unlocked by the caller. It is used with file-backed mappings to prevent races with other parts of the kernel which may be trying to access the same page. 




All callers of the `populate()` VMA operation have been changed, and that method no longer exists. There is an entry in the feature removal schedule for `nopage()` indicating that it will go away "as soon as possible." The kernel still has a number of `nopage()` implementations, though, so getting rid of it may take a little while yet. Longer-term plans call for the removal of `nopfn()` as well, though no date has been set for this change. Certainly any new code which implements `mmap()` should be written to handle faults with `fault()` rather than one of the older functions.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [fault()](/Kernel/Index#fault)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
