# Large pages, large blocks, and large problems [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 19, 2007 

Most of the core virtual memory subsystem developers met for a mini-summit just before the 2007 Kernel Summit in Cambridge. They came away feeling that they had resolved a number of VM scalability problems. Subsequent discussions have made it clear that, perhaps, this conclusion was a bit premature. They may well have resolved things, but it is not clear that everybody came to the same resolution. 

All of the issues at hand relate to scalability in one way or another. While the virtual memory subsystem has been through a great many changes aimed at making it work well on contemporary systems, one key aspect of how it works has remained essentially unchanged since the beginning: the 4096-byte (on most architectures) page size. Over that time, the amount of memory installed on a typical system has grown by about three orders of magnitude - that's 1000 times more pages that the kernel must manage and 1000 times more page faults which must be handled. Since it does not appear that this trend will stop soon, there is a clear scalability problem which must be managed. 

This problem is complicated by the way that Linux tends to fragment its memory. Almost all memory allocations are done in units of a single page, with the result that system RAM tends to get scattered into large numbers of single-page chunks. The kernel's memory allocator tries to keep larger groups of pages together, but there are limits to how successful it can be. The file `/proc/buddyinfo` can be illustrative here; on a system which has been running and busy for a while, the number of higher-order (larger) pages, as shown in the rightmost columns, will be very small. 

The main response to memory fragmentation has been to avoid higher-order allocations at almost any cost. There are very few places in the kernel where allocations of multiple contiguous pages are done. This approach has worked for some time, but avoiding larger allocations does not always make the need for such allocations go away. In fact, there are many things which could benefit from larger contiguous memory areas, including: 

  * Applications which use large amounts of memory will be working with large numbers of pages. The translation lookaside buffer (TLB) in the CPU, which speeds virtual address lookups, is generally relatively small, to the point that large applications run up a lot of time-consuming TLB misses. Larger pages require fewer TLB entries, and will thus result in faster execution. The hugetlbfs extension was created for just this purpose, but it is a specialized mechanism used by few applications, and it does not do anything special to make large contiguous memory regions easier for the kernel to find. 

  * I/O operations can work better with larger contiguous chunks of data to work with. Users trying to use "jumbo frames" (extra-large packets) on high-performance network adapters have been experiencing problems for a while. Many devices are limited in the number of scatter/gather entries they support for a single operation, so small buffers limit the overall I/O operation size. Disk devices are pushing toward larger sector sizes which would best be supported by larger contiguous buffers within the kernel. 

  * Filesystems are feeling pressure to use larger block sizes for a number of performance reasons. [This message from David Chinner](/Articles/250466/) provides an excellent explanation of why filesystems benefit from larger blocks. But it is hard (on Linux) for a filesystem to work with block sizes larger than the page size; XFS does it, but the resulting code is seen as non-optimal and is not as fast as it could be. Most other filesystems do not even try; as a result, an ext3 filesystem created on a system with 8192-byte pages cannot be mounted on a system with smaller pages. 




None of these issues are a surprise; developers have seen them coming for some time. So there are a number of potential solutions waiting on the wings. What is lacking is a consensus on which solution is the best way to go. 

One piece of the puzzle may be Mel Gorman's [fragmentation avoidance work](http://lwn.net/Articles/224829/), which has been discussed here more than once. Mel's patches seek to separate allocations which can be moved in physical memory from those which cannot. When movable allocations are grouped together, the kernel can, when necessary, create higher-order groups of pages by relocating allocations which are in the way. Some of Mel's work is in 2.6.23; more may be merged for 2.6.24. The [lumpy reclaim](http://lwn.net/Articles/211505/) patches, also in 2.6.23, encourage the creation of large blocks by targeting adjacent pages when memory is being reclaimed. 

The immediate cause for the current discussion is a new version of Christoph Lameter's [large block size](http://lwn.net/Articles/232757/) patches. Christoph has filled in the largest remaining gap in that patch set by implementing `mmap()` support. This code enables the page cache to manage chunks of file data larger than a single page which, in turn, addresses many of the I/O and filesystem issues. Christoph has given [a long list of reasons](http://lwn.net/Articles/249169/) why this patch should be merged, but agreement is not universal. 

At the top of the list of objections would appear to be the fact that the large block size patches require the availability of higher-order pages to work; there is no fallback if memory becomes sufficiently fragmented that those allocations are not available. So a system which has filesystems using larger block sizes will fall apart in the absence of large, contiguous blocks of memory - and, as we have seen, that is not an uncommon situation on Linux systems. The fragmentation avoidance patches can improve the situation quite a bit, but there is no guarantee that  [PULL QUOTE:  If this patch set is merged, some developers want it to include a loud warning to discourage users from actually expecting it to work.  END QUOTE] fragmentation will not occur, either as a result of the wrong workload or a deliberate attack. So, if this patch set is merged, some developers want it to include a loud warning to discourage users (and distributors) from actually expecting it to work. 

An alternative is Nick Piggin's [fsblock](http://lwn.net/Articles/239621/) work. People like to complain about the buffer head layer in current kernels, but that layer has a purpose: it tracks the mapping between page cache blocks and the associated physical disk sectors. The fsblock patch replaces the buffer head code with a new implementation with the goals of better performance and cleaner abstractions. 

One of the things fsblock can do is support large blocks for filesystems. The current patch does not use higher-order allocations to implement this support; instead, large blocks are made virtually contiguous in the `vmalloc()` space through a call to `vmap()` \- a technique used by XFS now. The advantage of using `vmap()` is that the filesystem code can see large, contiguous blocks without the need for physical adjacency, so fragmentation is not an issue. 

On the other hand, using `vmap()` is quite slow, the address space available for `vmap()` on 32-bit systems is small enough to cause problems, and using `vmap()` does nothing to help at the I/O level. So Nick plans to extend fsblock to implement large blocks with contiguous allocations, but with a fallback to `vmap()` when large allocations are not available. In theory, this approach should be be best of both worlds, giving the benefits of large blocks without unseemly explosions in the presence of fragmentation. [Says Nick](/Articles/250371/): 

However fsblock can do everything that higher order pagecache can do in terms of avoiding vmap and giving contiguous memory to block devices by opportunistically allocating higher orders of pages, and falling back to vmap if they cannot be satisfied. 

From the conversation, it seems that a number of developers see fsblock as the future. But it is not something for the near future. The patch is big, intrusive, and scary, which will slow its progress (and memory management patches have a tendency to merge at a glacial pace to begin with). It lacks the opportunistic large block feature. Only the Minix filesystem has been updated to use fsblock, and that patch was rather large. Everybody (including Nick) anticipates that more complex filesystems - those with features like journaling - will present surprises and require changes of unknown size. Fsblock is not a near-term solution. 

One [recently-posted patch](http://lwn.net/Articles/250460/) from Christoph could help fill in some of the gaps. His "virtual compound page" patch allows kernel code to request a large, contiguous allocation; that request will be satisfied with physically contiguous memory if possible. If that memory is not available, virtually contiguous memory will be returned instead. Beyond providing opportunistic large block allocation for fsblock, this feature could conceivably be used in a number of places where `vmalloc()` is called now, resulting in better performance when memory is not overly fragmented. 

Meanwhile, Andrea Arcangeli has been relatively quiet for some time, but one should not forget that he is the author of much of the VM code in the kernel now. He [advocates a different approach entirely](/Articles/250368/): 

From my part I am really convinced the only sane way to approach the VM scalability and larger-physically contiguous pages problem is the CONFIG_PAGE_SHIFT patch (aka large PAGE_SIZE from Hugh for 2.4). 

The [CONFIG_PAGE_SHIFT patch](http://lwn.net/Articles/240914/) is a rework of an old idea: separate the size of a page as seen by the operating system from the hardware's notion of the page size. Hardware pages can be clustered together to create larger software pages which, in turn, become the basic unit of memory management. If all pages in the system were, say, 64KB in length, a 64KB buffer would be a single-page allocation with no fragmentation issues at all. 

If the system is to go to larger pages, creating them in software is about the only option. Most processors support more than one hardware page size, but the smallest of the larger page sizes tend to be too large for general use. For example, i386 processors have no page sizes between 4KB and 2MB. Clustering pages in software enables the use of more reasonable page sizes and creates the flexibility needed to optimize the page size for the expected load on the system. This approach will make large block support easy, and it will help with the I/O performance issues as well. Page clustering is not helpful for TLB pressure problems, but there is little to be done there in any sort of general way. 

The biggest problem, perhaps, with page clustering is that it replaces external fragmentation with internal fragmentation. A 64KB page will, when used as the page cache for a 1KB file, waste 63KB of memory. There are provisions in Andrea's patch for splitting large pages to handle this situation; Andrea claims that this splitting will not lead to the same sort of fragmentation seen on current systems, but he has not, yet, convinced the others of this fact. 

Conclusions from this discussion are hard to come by; at one point Mel Gorman [asked](/Articles/250372/): ""Are we going to agree on some sort of plan or are we just going to handwave ourselves to death?"" Linus has just [called the whole discussion "idiotic"](/Articles/250373/). What may happen is that the large block size patches go in - with warnings - as a way of keeping a small subset of users happy and providing more information about the problem space. Memory management hacking requires a certain amount of black-magic handwaving in the best of times; there is no reason to believe that the waving of hands is going to slow down anytime soon this time around.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [fsblock](/Kernel/Index#fsblock)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Huge pages](/Kernel/Index#Huge_pages)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Memory management/Large allocations](/Kernel/Index#Memory_management-Large_allocations)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
