# The new timerfd() API [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 25, 2007 

The `timerfd()` system call was added in the 2.6.22 kernel. The core idea behind `timerfd()` \- allowing a process to associate a file descriptor with timer events - is not controversial, but the implementation of this idea did, belatedly, [raise a few eyebrows](http://lwn.net/Articles/245533/). In particular, Michael Kerrisk pointed out that `timerfd()` was inconsistent with (and less powerful than) the existing timer-related system calls, and, besides, the 2.6.22 version did not even work as advertised. After a fair amount of discussion, it became clear that the issues with this system call would not be worked out in the 2.6.23 time frame. So the 2.6.23-rc7 prepatch disabled `timerfd()` altogether in an attempt to prevent application developers from using an API which is going to change. 

Prompted by all of this, Davide Libenzi (the creator of the original `timerfd()` system call) has posted [a proposal for a revised `timerfd()` API](http://lwn.net/Articles/251227/). The single system call has turned into three different calls with a few new features. 

Under the new API, an application wanting to create a file descriptor for timer events would make a call to: 
    
    
        int timerfd_create(int clockid);
    

Where `clockid` describes which clock should be used; it will be either `CLOCK_MONOTONIC` or `CLOCK_REALTIME`. The return value will, if all goes well, be the requested file descriptor. 

A timer event can be requested with: 
    
    
        int timerfd_settime(int fd, int flags, const struct itimerspec *timer,
    			struct itimerspec *previous);
    

Here, `fd` is a file descriptor obtained from `timerfd_create()`, and `timer` gives the desired expiration time (and re-arming interval value, if desired). This time is normally a relative time, but if the timer sets the `TFD_TIMER_ABSTIME` bit in `flags`, it will be interpreted as an absolute time instead. If `previous` is not `NULL`, the pointed-to structure will be filled with the previous value of the timer. This ability to obtain the previous value is one of the features which was lacking in the original `timerfd()` implementation. 

That implementation also had no way for an application to simply ask what the current value of the timer was. The new API provides a function for querying a timer non-destructively: 
    
    
        int timerfd_gettime(int fd, struct itimerspec *timer);
    

This system call will store the current expiration time (if any) associated with `fd` into `timer`. 

The `read()` interface is essentially unchanged. A process which reads on a timer file descriptor will block if the timer has not yet expired. It will then read a 64-bit integer value indicating how many times the timer has expired since it was last read. A timer file descriptor can be passed to `poll()`, allowing timers to be handled in an applications main event loop. 

Responses to the new API proposal have been muted at best; hopefully this silence means that developers are happy with the new system calls. The alternative is that this iteration of `timerfd()` will not be reviewed any more extensively than its predecessor was. As things stand, the new set of system calls looks likely to be merged for 2.6.24.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [timerfd()](/Kernel/Index#timerfd)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [User-space API](/Kernel/Index#User-space_API)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
