# CRFS and POHMELFS [LWN.net]

By
Jake Edge
February 6, 2008
Performance, or lack thereof, has often been a knock against the
venerable Network File System (NFS), but no real competition has emerged.
NFS also has some serious flaws for programmers and users, with behavior
that is markedly different from that of local filesystems.  Both of these
problems are spurring the creation of new network filesystems; two of
which were announced in the last week.
The Coherent Remote File System (CRFS) was introduced last week at
linux.conf.au by Zach Brown of Oracle.  It uses
BTRFS
—pronounced
"butter-f-s"—as its storage on the server, rather than layering atop
any POSIX filesystem as NFS does.  According to Brown, BTRFS has a number
of important features that outweigh the inconvenience for users of getting
their data into a BTRFS volume.  The biggest is the ability to do compound
operations (creating or unlinking a file for example) in an atomic and
idempotent manner.
CRFS has a userspace daemon (crfsd) that talks to the BTRFS volume as well
as multiple clients.  The clients use the kernel VFS caching infrastructure
extensively, thus are implemented as kernel modules.  A user wishing
to access the underlying BTRFS volume on the server, must mount it as a
CRFS volume; crfsd must have exclusive access to the BTRFS.  This is also
different from NFS which will cooperate with local mounts of the underlying
filesystem.
The basic idea behind CRFS is to have clients cache as much of the
filesystem data as they can while using cache coherency protocols to reduce
the amount of network traffic that gets generated.  Clients
keep track of the cache state for each object they have stored, while the
server tracks the cache state of all objects that any client has.  The
messages between server and client consist of cache state transitions and
the data being transferred.
Data transfer in both directions is done using CRFS "item ranges".  CRFS
objects use the BTRFS key scheme to represent objects (file data, directories,
directory entries, inodes, etc.) in the filesystem.
An item range is a contiguous section of the key space, specified by a
minimum and maximum key value as part of the message.  When the client is
filling its cache, it can request a particular key but also offer to take
other surrounding keys as part of the response; if the server sees those
keys in the BTRFS leaf node, it can send them along as well.
Something on the order of a 3x speedup over asynchronous NFS mounts is
the current performance of CRFS for a simple untar.  Comparing to
synchronous NFS mounts (where each write has to actually hit the remote
disk) is not a sensible comparison; there is a roughly 10x speed difference
between the two types of NFS mounts.  Brown has been working on CRFS for
"about a year" and is planning to release the code eventually.  Until that
happens, the
slides
[PDF]
and
video
[Theora]
from his talk—as well as a few
postings to his weblog
—are the only
sources of information about CRFS.
Another filesystem, that aims to have a broader reach than
CRFS, is the
Parallel Optimized Host Message Exchange
Layered File System
(POHMELFS), announced in linux-kernel posting by
Evgeniy Polyakov.  POHMELFS is meant to be a building block for a
distributed filesystem that would offer a multi-server architecture and
allow for disconnected filesystem operations.  Polyakov has only been
working on it for a month, so it is, at best, the start of a proof of concept.
The POHMELFS vision is in some ways similar to CRFS in that the clients
will handle as much as possible locally, with minimal server interaction.
Like CRFS, client kernel modules talk to a server userspace daemon, using
cache coherency protocols to keep the data and metadata in sync.  For CRFS,
the coherency is not yet implemented, but is fleshed out to some
 extent,
while POHMELFS has quite a bit of fleshing out to do.  Unlike CRFS,
POHMELFS supports POSIX filesystems on the server side and the code is
available now.
There are some rather large hurdles to overcome in the POHMELFS vision, not
least of which is handling file IDs in separate client-side filesystems such
that they can be synchronized with the server.  The current code implements
a write-through cache version that creates objects on the server before
they are
used in the client side cache.  There is also an additional patch that
implements a hack to disable the
writeback cache and use only the client side caching.  The latter is, not
surprisingly, very fast, but not terribly usable for multiple mounts of the
filesystem.   Essentially Polyakov is showing the benefits of client-side
caching, but in the context of a broader scheme.
It will be a long time, if ever, that we see some descendant of either of
these filesystems in the kernel.  There is much work to be done, but they
are worth looking at to see where networking and distributed filesystems may be
headed.  For them to be useful outside of just
the Linux world—like the ubiquity of NFS—there would have to be some kind of standardization
followed by adoption by the major players.  That will take a very long time.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Filesystems/Network
Kernel
Network filesystems
to post comments