# The rest of the vmsplice() exploit story [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 4, 2008 

Back in February, LWN published [a discussion of the `vmsplice()` exploit](http://lwn.net/Articles/268783/) which showed how the failure to check permissions for a read operation led to a buffer overflow within the kernel. Subsequently, a linux-kernel reader [pointed out](http://lwn.net/Articles/269532/) that the article stopped short of a complete explanation: this is not an ordinary buffer overflow exploit. Travel schedules and such prevented the writing of an immediate followup, but your editor would still like to tell the full story. So this article picks up where the last one left off and describes how the `vmsplice()` exploit makes use of this buffer overflow to take over the system. 

When `vmsplice()` is being used to feed data from memory into a pipe, the function charged with making it all happen is `vmsplice_to_pipe()`, found in `fs/splice.c`. It declares a couple of arrays of interest: 
    
    
        struct page *pages[PIPE_BUFFERS];
        struct partial_page partial[PIPE_BUFFERS];
    

`PIPE_BUFFERS`, remember, is 16 on exploitable configurations. Both of these arrays are passed into `get_iovec_page_array()`, which, as described in the previous article, makes a call to `get_user_pages()` to fill in the `pages` array. As a result of the failure to check whether the calling application is allowed to read the requested region of memory, `get_user_pages()` will overflow the `pages` array, writing far more than `PIPE_BUFFERS` pointers into it. These are, however, pointers to legitimate kernel data structures; it remains to be seen how this overflow enables the attacker to take control of the system. 

The `partial` array is also passed into `get_iovec_page_array()`; it describes the portion of each page which should be written into the pipe. To that end, a loop like this is run immediately after returning from `get_user_pages()`: 
    
    
        for (i = 0; i < error; i++) {
    	const int plen = min_t(size_t, len, PAGE_SIZE - off);
    	partial[buffers].offset = off;
    	partial[buffers].len = plen;
    	/* ... */
        }
    

Since full pages are being written in this case, the calculated offset will be zero, and the length will be `PAGE_SIZE` (4096). The value of `error` is the return value from `get_user_pages()`; that will be the number of pages actually mapped: 46, in the case of the exploit. Remember that the `partial` array is also dimensioned to hold 16 entries, so this loop will overflow that array as well. 

Both of these arrays are declared, one right after the other, in `vmsplice_to_page()`. A quick test by your editor suggests that the `partial` array will be placed below `pages` in memory, so, once `partial` is overflowed, the loop will start overwriting `pages` instead. So the `pages` array will end up containing alternating values of zero and 4096 rather than the real `struct page` pointers it had before. (It's worth noting that the exploit still works if the arrays are placed in the opposite order, since the overflow causes code down the line to think that `pages` is larger than it really is). 

Once all this has happened, control returns to `vmsplice_to_pipe()` \- the overflow is not big enough to have overwritten the return address. A call to `splice_to_pipe()` is supposed to finish the job, but something interesting happens there. Toward the beginning of this function, this test is made: 
    
    
        if (!pipe->readers) {
    	send_sig(SIGPIPE, current, 0);
    	if (!ret)
    	    ret = -EPIPE;
        	break;
        }
    

Looking back at [the exploit code](http://www.milw0rm.com/exploits/5092), we see that it closes the read side of the pipe before calling `vmsplice()`. So `splice_to_pipe()` will quit almost immediately. On its way out, however, it does this: 
    
    
        while (page_nr < spd_pages)
    	page_cache_release(spd->pages[page_nr++]);
    

The call to `get_user_pages()` will have locked each of the relevant pages into memory to allow the kernel to work with them; this is the cleanup code which goes back and unlocks the pages which will not be used. But remember that the pointers in the `pages` array have been overwritten, and are now either zero or 4096. What would normally happen here is a kernel oops, since those are not legitimate addresses. The exploit code has done something tricky, though: using some special `mmap()` calls, it has created some anonymous memory at the bottom of its address space. 

Directly dereferencing user-space addresses while running in kernel mode is frowned upon for a number of reasons; it can blow up in a number of ways. But, if the address is valid and the relevant page is resident in memory, direct access to user-space memory will work. So, when the kernel starts to work with the addresses that it thinks are `struct page` pointers, it does not get any sort of fault; instead, it gets the data placed in that memory by the exploit. Needless to say, that data has been arranged carefully. 

The Linux kernel normally manages each page as an independent object. There are times, however, when pages are grouped into larger units, called "compound pages." This generally happens when physically contiguous allocations larger than one page are needed by the kernel; when this happens, a compound page is passed back to the caller. These pages are special in that they must be split back apart when they are released back into the system, and there may be other cleanup work to do. So compound pages have an attribute not found on normal pages: a destructor which is called when the page is freed. 

So, if we look at how the exploit sets up its low-memory `page` structures, we see: 
    
    
        pages[0]->flags    = 1 << PG_compound;
        pages[0]->private  = (unsigned long) pages[0];
        pages[0]->count    = 1;
        pages[1]->lru.next = (long) kernel_code;
    

When the kernel looks for a `page` structure at user-space address zero, it will find something which looks like a compound page. The destructor (stored in the `lru.next` field of the second `page` structure) is set to `kernel_code()`, a function defined within the exploit itself. Since the `count` is set to one, the call to `page_cache_release()` (which decrements that count) will conclude that there are no further references and, since the page looks like a compound page, the destructor will be called. At this point, the exploit has arbitrary code running in kernel mode, and the show is truly over. This code just sets the process's `uid` to zero (giving it root access), then engages in some assembly-language trickery to return immediately to user space, shorting out the rest of the cleanup process. 

There are a couple of interesting implications from all of this. One, clearly, is that this exploit is not something which was bashed out by a script kiddie somewhere. It was written by somebody who understands low-level kernel code quite well and who is able to use that understanding to escalate an apparent information-disclosure vulnerability into a full code execution problem. It is, clearly, a mistake to underestimate those who write exploits, not all of whom immediately make their works known to the development community. One also should not assume that they have not already written exploits for other, still unfixed bugs. 

Also worth noting is the fact that ordinary buffer overflow protection may well have not been effective against this vulnerability. The return address on the stack was not overwritten, and no exploit code was put in data areas. This episode has caused a renewed interested in technical security measures in the kernel. These measures are good, but it would be a mistake to think that they will fix the problem. What is really needed is stronger review of patches with security in mind; it is not yet clear to your editor that this review is happening.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Vulnerabilities](/Kernel/Index#Security-Vulnerabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Vulnerabilities/Privilege escalation](/Security/Index/#Vulnerabilities-Privilege_escalation)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
