# Linux 3.0? [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jake Edge**  
September 3, 2008 

The [Linux kernel summit](https://www.linuxfoundation.org/events/kernel) is happening this month, so various discussion topics are being tossed around on the [Ksummit-2008-discuss mailing list](https://lists.linux-foundation.org/mailman/listinfo/ksummit-2008-discuss). Alan Cox [suggested](https://lists.linux-foundation.org/pipermail/ksummit-2008-discuss/2008-August/000557.html) a Linux release that would "throw out" some accumulated, unmaintained cruft as a topic to be discussed. Cox would like to see that release be well publicized, with a new release number, so that the intention of the release would be clear. While there will be disagreements about _which_ drivers and subsystems can be removed, participants in the thread seem favorably disposed to the idea—at least enough that it should be discussed. 

There is already a process in place for deprecating and eventually removing parts of the kernel that need it, but it is somewhat haphazardly used. Cox proposes: 

At some point soon we add all the old legacy ISA drivers (barring the odd ones that turn up in embedded chipsets on LPC bus) into the feature-removal list and declare an 'ISA death' flag day which we brand 2.8 or 3.0 or something so everyone knows that we are having a single clean 'throw out' of old junk. 

It would also be a chance to throw out a whole pile of other "legacy" things like ipt_tos, bzImage symlinks, ancient SCTP options, ancient lmsensor support, V4L1 only driver stuff etc. 

Cox's list sparked immediate protest about some of the items on it, but the general idea was well received. There are certainly sizable portions of the kernel, especially for older hardware, that are unmaintained and probably completely broken. No one seems to have any interest in carrying that stuff forward, but, without a concerted effort to identify and remove crufty code, it is likely to remain. Cox has suggested one way to make that happen; discussion at the kernel summit might refine his idea or come up with something entirely different. 

Part of the reason that unmaintained code tends to hang around is that the kernel hackers have gotten much better at fixing all affected code when they make an API change. While that is definitely a change for the better, it does have the effect of sometimes hiding code that might be ready to be removed. In earlier times, dead code would have become unbuildable after an API change or two leading to either a maintainer stepping up or the code being removed. 

The need to make a "major" kernel release, with a corresponding change to the major or minor release number is the biggest question that the kernel hackers seem to have. Greg Kroah-Hartman [asks](https://lists.linux-foundation.org/pipermail/ksummit-2008-discuss/2008-August/000562.html): 

Can't we do all of the above today in our current model? Or is it just a marketing thing to bump to 3.0? If so, should we just pick a release and say, "here, 2.6.31 is the last 2.6 kernel and for the next 3 months we are just going to rip things out and create 3.0"? 

There is an element of "marketing" to Cox's proposal. Publicizing a major release, along with the intention to get rid of "legacy" code, will allow interested parties to step up to maintain pieces that they do not want to see removed. As Cox, [puts it](https://lists.linux-foundation.org/pipermail/ksummit-2008-discuss/2008-August/000563.html): 

I thought it might be useful to actually draw some definite lines so we can actually get around to throwing stuff out rather than letting it rot forever and also if its well telegraphed both give people a chance to fix where the line goes and - yes - as a marketing thing as much as anything else to define the line in a way that non-techies, press etc get. 

Plus it appeals to my sense of the open source way of doing things differently - a major release about getting rid of old junk not about adding more new wackiness people don't need 8) 

Arjan van de Ven [thinks](https://lists.linux-foundation.org/pipermail/ksummit-2008-discuss/2008-August/000560.html) that gathering the list of things to be removed is a good exercise: 

I like the idea of at least discussing this, and for a bunch of people making a long list of what would go. Based on that whole list it becomes a value discussion/decision; is there enough of this to make it worth doing. 

Once the list has been gathered and discussed, van de Ven [notes](https://lists.linux-foundation.org/pipermail/ksummit-2008-discuss/2008-August/000566.html), it may well be that it can be done under the current development model, without a major release. ""But let's at least do the exercise. It's worth validating the model we have once in a while ;)"" 

This may not be the only discussion of kernel version numbers that takes place at the summit. Back in July, Linus Torvalds [mentioned a bikeshed painting project](/Articles/296637/) that he planned to bring up. It seems that Torvalds is less than completely happy with how large the minor release number of the kernel is; he would like to see numbers that have more meaning, possibly date-based: 

The only thing I do know is that I agree that "big meaningless numbers" are bad. "26" is already pretty big. As you point out, the 2.4.x series has much bigger numbers yet. 

And yes, something like "2008" is obviously numerically bigger, but has a direct meaning and as such is possibly better than something arbitrary and non-descriptive like "26". 

Version numbers are not important, per se, but having a consistent, well-understood numbering scheme certainly is. The current system has been in place for four years or so without much need to modify it. That may still be the case, but with ideas about altering it coming from multiple directions, there could be changes afoot as well. 

For the kernel hackers themselves, there is little benefit—except, perhaps, preventing the annoyance of ever-increasing numbers—but version numbering _does_ provide a mechanism to communicate with the "outside world". Users have come to expect the occasional major release, with some sizable and visible chunk of changes, but the current incremental kernel releases do not provide that _numerically_ ; instead, big changes come with nearly every kernel release. There may be value in raising the visibility of one particular release, either as a means to clean up the kernel or to move to a different versioning scheme—perhaps both at once. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Version numbers](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Version_numbers)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases](/Kernel/Index#Releases)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
