# Tbench troubles II [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
November 19, 2008
LWN has previously
covered
concerns over slowly deteriorating performance by current Linux systems on
the network- and scheduler-heavy tbench benchmark.  Tbench runs have been
getting worse since roughly 2.6.22.  At the end of the last episode,
attention had been directed toward the CFS scheduler as the presumptive
culprit.  That article concluded with the suggestion that, now that
attention had been focused on the scheduler's role in the tbench
performance regression, fixes would be relatively quick in coming.  One
month later, it
would appear that those fixes have indeed come, and that developers looking
for better tbench results will need to cast their gaze beyond the
scheduler.
The discussion resumed after a routine weekly posting of the post-2.6.26
regression list;
one entry in that list
is
the tbench performance issue.  Ingo Molnar
responded
to that posting with a pointer to
an
extensive set of benchmark runs
done by Mike Galbraith.  The conclusion
Ingo draws from all those runs is that the CFS scheduler is now faster than
the old O(1) scheduler, and that "
all scheduler components of this
regression have been eliminated.
"  Beyond that:
In fact his numbers show that scheduler speedups since 2.6.22 have
	offset and hidden most other sources of tbench
	regression. (i.e. the scheduler portion got 5% faster, hence it was
	able to offset a slowdown of 5% in other areas of the kernel that
	tbench triggers)
This improvement is not something that just happened; it is the result of a
focused effort on the part of the scheduler developers.  Quite a few
changes have been merged; they all seem like small tweaks, but, together,
they add up to substantial improvements in scheduler performance.
One
change
fixes a spot where the scheduler code disabled interrupts
needlessly.  Some others (
here
and
here
)
adjust the scheduler's "wakeup buddy" mechanism, a feature which ties
processes together in the scheduler's view.  As an example, consider a
process which wakes up a second process, then runs out of its allocated
time on the CPU.  The wakeup buddy system will cause the scheduler to bias
its selection mechanism to favor the just-waked process, on the theory that
said process will be consuming cache-warm data created by the waking
process.  By allowing cooperating processes like this to run slightly ahead
of what a strictly fair scheduling algorithm would provide, the scheduler
gets better performance out of the system as a whole.
The recent changes add a "backward buddy" concept.  If there is no recently-waked
process to switch to, the scheduler will, instead, bias the selection
toward the process which was preempted to enable the outgoing process to
run.  Chances are relatively good that the preempted process might
(1) be cooperating with the outgoing process or (2) have some
data still in cache - or both.  So running that process next is likely to
yield better performance overall.
A number of other small changes have been merged, to the point that the
scheduler developers think that the tbench regressions are no longer their
problem.  Networking maintainer David Miller has
disagreed
with this assessment, though,
claiming that performance problems still exist in the scheduler.  Ingo responded
in a couple of ways, starting with the posting of
some profiling results
which show very little
scheduler overhead.  Interestingly, it turns out that the networking
developers get different results from their profiling runs than the
scheduler developers do.  And that, in turn, is a result of the different
hardware that they are using for their work.  Ingo has a bleeding-edge
Intel processor to play with; the networking folks have processors which
are not quite so new.  David Miller tends to run on SPARC processors, which
may be adding unique problems of their own.
The other thing Ingo did was, for all practical purposes, to profile the
entire kernel code path involved in a tbench run, then to disassemble
the executable and examine the profile results on a per-instruction basis.
The postings that resulted (
example
) point
out a number of potential problem spots, most of which are in the
networking code.  Some of those have already been fixed, while others are
being disputed.  It is, in the end, a large amount of raw data which is
likely to inspire discussion for a while.
To an outsider, this whole affair can have the look of an ongoing
finger-pointing exercise.  And, perhaps, that's what it is.  But it's
highly-technical finger-pointing which has increased the understanding of
how the kernel responds to a specific type of stress while also
demonstrating the limits of some of our measurement tools and the
performance differences exhibited by various types of hardware.  The end
result will be a faster, more tightly-tuned kernel - and better tbench
numbers too.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Scheduler/Testing and benchmarking
to post comments