# 2.6.29 merge window, part 2 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 14, 2009 

Linus Torvalds [released 2.6.29-rc1](http://lwn.net/Articles/314472/) and closed the 2.6.29 merge window on January 10. A little over 2000 changesets were merged after the writing of [last week's merge window summary](http://lwn.net/Articles/313521/); this article completes the summary for this development cycle. 

Before getting into the details, though, it is worth pointing out that the 2.6.29-rc1 kernel has a couple of unusual traps for developers and testers. If you are playing with this kernel, you should be aware of the following: 

  * The Btrfs merge brought with it the entire development history for that project. One interesting result is that, if one uses git to check out a tree within that development history, the result will be a tree containing _only_ Btrfs. In particular, this can happen in the middle of a bisection process, yielding a tree which cannot be built or tested - almost certainly not the desired result. The solution is easy, though; simply run: 
        
        git bisect good
        

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

and continue with the bisection process as usual. 

  * There is [a portion of the kernel history](/Articles/314774/) which contains a badly broken version of reiserfs. Again, only developers running kernels from arbitrary points in the history will be affected by this problem; if you run reiserfs, though, read the summary and take care. 




So what else was merged for 2.6.29? User-visible changes include: 

  * At the top of the list, of course, is the merge of the Btrfs filesystem. It cannot be repeated too many times, though, that Btrfs is still a _development_ filesystem. Things are changing quickly, and it still will panic the system if you run out of space. Now is a good time for people to play with Btrfs - especially those who are willing to report bugs or submit enhancements. But it is not, yet, time to entrust your Valuable Intellectual Property to this filesystem. 

  * Also merged was the [squashfs](http://squashfs.sourceforge.net/) compressed, read-only filesystem. Squashfs has been packaged by distributors for years; its merger into the mainline was certainly overdue. 

  * There is now kernel support for WiMAX networking. The current code supports Intel's Wireless Wimax Connection 2400m devices, but others are expected for the future. See [this documentation file](/Articles/314787/) for a bit of information on the WiMAX stack. 

  * There are new drivers for Atmel AVR32-based Hammerhead boards, Linear Technology LTC4245 Multiple Supply Hot Swap Controller I2C interfaces, Oxford OXU210HP USB host/OTG/device controllers, MIPS CI13412 USB controllers, Freescale IMX USB peripheral controllers, TI TWL4030 USB transceivers, Dell-specific laptop backlight and rfkill devices, ALIX.2 and ALIX.3 series LED controllers, PIKA FPGA watchdog devices, GE Fanuc watchdog timers, and NXP PCF50633 multifunction chips (as seen in OpenMoko devices). 

  * The Blackfin architecture has gained symmetric multiprocessing support. Also added is support for the BF51x family of processors. 

  * The memory controller has been extended to control swap usage as well. Previously, it would be possible for a memory-controlled group to exhaust swap space. 

  * The new "xenfs" virtual filesystem allows for information sharing and control between Xen domains, the hypervisor, and the host system. 

  * It is now possible to create and run ext4 filesystems without a journal. One loses the benefits of journaling, obviously, but there is a notable increase in performance. 

  * The [filesystem freeze](http://lwn.net/Articles/287435/) feature, allowing a suitably-privileged user to suspend changes to a filesystem (for backup purposes, perhaps) has been merged. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The [exclusive I/O memory allocation functions](http://lwn.net/Articles/308426/) have been merged. 

  * The exports for a number of SUNRPC functions have been changed to GPL-only. 

  * The internal MTD (memory technology device) API has seen significant changes aimed at supporting larger devices (those requiring 64-bit sizes). 

  * An [infrastructure for asynchronous function calls](http://lwn.net/Articles/314808/) has been merged. This code is still a work in progress, though, and, for 2.6.29, it will not be activated in the absence of the `fastboot` command-line parameter. 




And that completes the set of major changes added for 2.6.29 - with one possible exception. Linus has [indicated](/Articles/314797/) that he would be willing to slip in an updated version of the spinning mutex code (as described in [this Btrfs article](http://lwn.net/Articles/313682/)) if it passes review in the near future.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/2.6.29](/Kernel/Index#Releases-2.6.29)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
