# A lockless ring-buffer [LWN.net]

By
Jake Edge
July 8, 2009
One of the outcomes from 
last year's Kernel Summit and Linux Plumbers Conference was a
plan to create a low-level
ring-buffer implementation
that could be shared among the various
kernel and user-space tracing solutions available for Linux.  One
implementation of the common ring-buffer was released as part of 2.6.28,
but it was somewhat lock-heavy, which impacted its performance.  Recently,
Steven Rostedt has
proposed
a
lockless ring-buffer algorithm, which would eliminate locking on writes,
which is the fast path for tracing.
As tracing information is gathered in the kernel, it needs to be stored
somewhere very quickly, so that the impact on the timing of the events
observed—and system performance overall—is fairly minimal.
Reading the data is done from user space, though, so it 
is generally not performance-sensitive.  The current ring-buffer
implementation creates a circular, doubly-linked list of pages, along with
a head and 
tail pointer, so writes are done at the tail, while reads are done from
the head.
If the ring-buffer gets full, or nearly so, there is the potential for
writers to overwrite data in the head page, which could corrupt data that
is being read.  For this reason, there is a separate reader page, which has
been removed from the list entirely, that reader
processes can use 
without being concerned about corruption from writers.  But, having that
separate page requires that there be a bit of a dance whenever the reader
is done with the page and needs a new one.  The reader page must be placed
back into the list somewhere after the tail, while the current head page
needs to 
be removed as the new reader page, and the head page must be pushed
forward.  That requires locking.
The diagram below, from Rostedt's
ring-buffer-design.txt
document
, gives an idea of how the ring-buffer would look.  Observant
readers will note the
H
pointer, which is the
HEADER
-flagged pointer
described below.
reader page
		  |
		  v
		 +---+
		 |   |------+
		 +---+      |
			    |
			    v
	+---+    +---+    +---+    +---+
    <---|   |--->|   |-H->|   |--->|   |--->
    --->|   |<---|   |<---|   |<---|   |<---
	+---+    +---+    +---+    +---+
Writers can be interrupted by other writers, so long as the interrupting
writer completes its write before the interrupted writer can continue.
This is in keeping with the way interrupts stack, and it is important that
it be enforced for the integrity of the ring-buffer structure.  When a
write is initiated, space is reserved after the tail pointer to hold the
event.  This moves the tail pointer, so another pointer, called the commit pointer, is needed to
track the latest complete write.
In nearly empty ring-buffers, it is possible for the reader page to also be
the commit and tail pages.  While the reader page has been removed from the
ring-buffer, its
next
pointer still leads to the next ring-buffer
entry.  Once enough writes are done, the commit and tail pointers will
simply follow the
next
pointer as they normally do.
In order to remove the locking for writers, which currently need to use
locks to synchronize updates of the head, tail, and commit pointers, Rostedt
leverages the
cmpxchg()
atomic operation available on some
architectures.  It works as follows:
R = cmpxchg(A, C, B) 
        - Assign A = B if A == C
        - Return A at the time of the call, unconditionally
The
success of the exchange can be determined by checking whether
R
is
equal to
C
, if so, the exchange was done.
The algorithm requires that the pointers to the linked-list structures be
4-byte aligned so that it can reserve the bottom 2 bits for flags.  The two
flags are:
HEADER
- the pointer is to the current head page
UPDATE
- the pointer is to a page that is currently being
written and either is, or is about to be, the head page
These flags, along with the
cmpxchg()
operation, are what allow
lockless writing to the buffer.
When the reader page has been exhausted, the current head page needs to be
detached from the ring-buffer as the new reader page.  By using the
HEADER
flag on the
next
pointer that
points to the head page, writers can keep readers from interfering without
taking a lock.  When trying to change the
next
pointer as part of
the swapping process, readers use
cmpxchg()
to require that the
HEADER
flag be present.  Writers can prevent that from happening
by setting the flag to
UPDATE
or clearing the flags entirely.
When the reader's
cmpxchg()
fails, it means that writers have
changed the state of the ring, so the reader must look for a new head page
and start the process all over.
When writers change to a new tail page, as they fill the buffer, they check
the
next
pointer of the new page for the
HEADER
flag.  If
it is present, it is changed to
UPDATE
.  That indicates that the
page is volatile, as writers are currently using it, and will cause the
cmpxchg()
of a reader to fail, should it try to detach the head
page.  This is an indication that the buffer is close to full, only one
page (i.e. the new tail page) remains for storing events.
The ring-buffer can operate in two modes, overwrite (aka "flight recorder")
mode, where new events overwrite older events when the buffer fills up, or
producer/consumer mode where writing to a full buffer causes the write to
fail.  In producer/consumer mode, the head page only changes at the behest
of a reader, but in overwrite mode, once the tail page reaches the head,
the head must be pushed forward one page, which is why the
UPDATE
flag must be used.
The basic function of the algorithm is relatively straightforward—if
a bit head-exploding—but there are number of more complex scenarios
to consider.  One is the possibility that nested writes cause the buffer to
fill, such that the tail page reaches the commit page.  There is no
choice but to drop writes at that point, but it is possible that the commit
page is on the reader page (as shown below).  Naïvely pushing the head page forward,
past the entry that the reader page points to,
would break the ability for the commit page to move from the reader page
back into the ring-buffer. So writers must check for this condition and
start dropping writes if it is detected.
reader page    commit page
		  |              |
		  v              |
		 +---+           |
		 |   |<----------+
		 |   |
		 |   |------+
		 +---+      |
			    |
			    v
	+---+    +---+    +---+    +---+
    <---|   |--->|   |-H->|   |--->|   |--->
    --->|   |<---|   |<---|   |<---|   |<---
	+---+    +---+    +---+    +---+
		   ^
		   |
	       tail page
Other complex scenarios are possible.  Interested readers are directed to
Rostedt's design document for more information.  It is quite detailed and
chock full of ASCII artwork depicting ring-buffer operations.  The algorithm itself is
the subject of a patent application by Rostedt for Red Hat.  If granted, it
will be available for free software implementations under Red Hat's
patent policy
.
Mathieu Desnoyers, developer of the
Linux Trace
Toolkit Next Generation
(LTTng), has been following the ring-buffer
submission closely, as LTTng would be one of the tracing solutions expected
to use the common ring-buffer.   The proposed algorithm is complex, "
near that
of RCU mechanisms
", he said, but unlike RCU (or the LTTng lockless
buffer algorithm), no formal proof of the algorithm has been done.
He agrees that lockless buffers for tracing are
desirable and achievable, but he is concerned that the lack of formal
verification of Rostedt's algorithm could lead to an extended period of bug
chasing.  
That complexity has a bit of a silver lining, though, as
Desnoyers
noted
in a review of the design: "
The great news to me is that no one can
say LTTng's lockless buffering 
algorithm is complex compared to this. ;)
"
Two other concerns he mentioned are performance and fast user-space
tracing.  Rostedt's 
algorithm depends on being able to disable preemption, which is not
possible for user-space tracing. Desnoyers said that LTTng has more
compact events which he
believes will allow the LTTng version to be able to handle more events
per second than Rostedt's, but no real performance comparisons have,
as yet, been done.  Desnoyers is hopeful that he will be able to
propose an alternative
lockless ring-buffer implementation based on the LTTng code sometime soon, but
there is the small matter of a Ph.D. dissertation to
complete before that can happen.
Rostedt is targeting the 2.6.32 kernel for merging the lockless
ring-buffer, it remains to be seen if there will be objections to its
inclusion.  It may also have to fend off alternatives.  Sooner or later,
though, some kind of lockless buffering for trace events seems likely to
make it into the kernel.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Tracing
to post comments