# O_*SYNC [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 1, 2009 

When developers think about forcing data written to files to be flushed to the underlying storage device, they tend to think about the `fsync()` system call. But it is also possible to request synchronous behavior for all operations on a file descriptor, either at `open()` time or using `fcntl()`. Support in Linux for synchronous I/O flags is likely to improve in 2.6.32, but this work has raised a couple of interesting issues with regard to the current implementation and forward compatibility. 

There are three standard-defined flags which can be used to specify synchronous I/O behavior: 

  * `O_SYNC`: requires that any write operations block until all data and all metadata have been written to persistent storage. 

  * `O_DSYNC`: like `O_SYNC`, except that there is no requirement to wait for any metadata changes which are not necessary to read the just-written data. In practice, `O_DSYNC` means that the application does not need to wait until ancillary information (the file modification time, for example) has been written to disk. Using `O_DSYNC` instead of `O_SYNC` can often eliminate the need to flush the file inode on a write. 

  * `O_RSYNC`: this flag, which only affects read operations, must be used in combination with either `O_SYNC` or `O_DSYNC`. It will cause a `read()` call to block until the data (and maybe metadata) being read has been flushed to disk (if necessary). This flag thus gives the kernel the option of delaying the flushing of data to disk; any number of writes can happen, but data need not be flushed until the application reads it back. 




`O_DSYNC` and `O_RSYNC` are not new; they were added to the relevant standards well over ten years ago. But Linux has never really supported them (they are optional features), so glibc simply defines them both to be the same as `O_SYNC`. 

Christoph Hellwig is [working on a proper implementation](/Articles/350221/) of these flags, with an eye toward merging the changes in 2.6.32. It should be a relatively straightforward change at this point; the kernel has some nice infrastructure for handling data and metadata flushing now. What is potentially harder is making the change in a way which best meets the expectations of existing applications. 

There are two unrelated issues which make this transition harder than one might expect it should be: 

  * Linux has never actually implemented `O_SYNC`; what applications have been getting, instead, is `O_DSYNC`. 

  * The `open()` implementation in the kernel simply ignores flags that it knows nothing about. This behavior can be changed only at risk of breaking unknown numbers of applications; it's an aspect of the kernel ABI. 




Given the first problem listed above, one might be tempted to make a new flag for `O_DSYNC` and use it to obtain the current behavior, while `O_SYNC` would get the full metadata synchronization semantics. If this were to be done, though, applications which are built against a new C library but run on an older kernel would be presenting an unknown flag to `open()`, which would duly ignore it. That application would not get synchronous I/O behavior at all, which is almost certainly not a good thing. So something trickier will have to be done. 

There is also the question of which semantics older applications should get. Jamie Lokier [argued](/Articles/350225/) that applications requesting `O_SYNC` behavior wanted full metadata synchronization, even if the kernel has been cheating them out of the full experience. So, when running under a future kernel with a proper `O_SYNC` implementation, an old, binary application should get `O_SYNC` behavior. Ulrich Drepper, instead, [thinks that behavior should not change](/Articles/350226/) for older applications: 

But these programs apparently can live with the broken semantics. I don't worry too much about this. If people really need the fixed O_SYNC semantics then let them recompile their code. 

It looks like Ulrich's view will win out, for the simple reason that the performance cost of the additional metadata synchronization seems worse than giving applications the semantics they have been running with anyway, even if those semantics are not quite what was promised. 

Christoph [outlined](/Articles/350227/) the likely course of action. Internally, `O_SYNC` will become `O_DSYNC`, and the `open()` flag which is currently `O_SYNC` will come to mean `O_DSYNC`. The `open()` system call will then take a new flag (name unknown; `O_FULLSYNC` and `O_ISYNC` have been suggested) which will be hidden from applications. At the glibc level, applications will see this: 
    
    
        #define O_SYNC	(O_FULLSYNC|O_DSYNC)
    

On older kernels, the `O_DSYNC` flag (with the same value as `O_SYNC` now) will yield the same behavior as always, while `O_FULLSYNC` will be ignored. On newer kernels, the new flag will yield the full `O_SYNC` semantics. As long as applications do not reach under the hood and try to manipulate the `O_FULLSYNC` flag directly, all will be well.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [O_SYNC](/Kernel/Index#O_SYNC)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
