# In brief [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
September 9, 2009
reflink() for 2.6.32
.  Joel Becker's
announcement
of his 2.6.32 ocfs2 merge plans
included a mention that the
reflink()
system call
would be merged alongside the ocfs2 changes.  A call to
reflink()
creates a lightweight copy, 
wherein both files share the same blocks in a copy-on-write mode.  The
final
reflink()
API looks like this:
int reflink(const char *oldpath, const char *newpath, int preserve);
    int reflinkat(int olddirfd, const char *oldpath,
                  int newdirfd, const char *newpath,
      		  int preserve,  int flags);
A call to
reflink()
causes
newpath
to look like a copy of
oldpath
.  If
preserve
is
REFLINK_ATTR_PRESERVE
,
then the entire security state of
oldpath
will be replicated for
the new file; this is a privileged operation.  Otherwise (if
preserve
is
REFLINK_ATTR_NONE
),
newpath
will get
a new security state as if it were an entirely new file.  The
reflinkat()
form adds the ability to supply the starting
directories for relative paths and flags like the other
*at()
system calls.  For more information, see the documentation file at the top
of
the
reflink()
patch
.
Joel's patch adds
reflink()
support for the ocfs2 filesystem; it's
not clear whether other filesystems will get
reflink()
support in
2.6.32 or not.
A stable debugfs?
.  Recurring linux-kernel arguments tend to focus
on vitally important issues - like where debugfs should be mounted.  The
official word is that it belongs on
/sys/kernel/debug
, but there
have been ongoing problems with rogue developers mounting it on unofficial places
like
/debug
instead.  Greg Kroah-Hartman
defends
/sys/kernel/debug
by noting
that debugfs is for kernel developers only; there's no reason for users to
be interested in it.
Except, of course, that there is.  The increasing utility of the ftrace
framework is making it more interesting beyond kernel development circles.
That led Steven Rostedt to
make a
suggestion
:
I think that the tracing system has matured beyond a "debug" level
	 and is being enabled on production systems. Both fedora and debian
	 are now shipping kernels with it enabled. Perhaps we should create
	 another pseudo fs that can be like debugfs but for stable ABIs. A
	 new interface could start out in debugfs, but when it has reached
	 a stable interface, then it could be moved to another location to
	 signal this.
Steven would like a new virtual filesystem for stable kernel ABIs
which is easier to work with than sysfs and which can be mounted in a more
typing-friendly location.  Responses to the suggestion have been scarce so
far; somebody will probably need to post a patch to get a real discussion
going.
data=guarded
.  Chris Mason has posted
a new version of the ext3
data=guarded mode patch
.  The guarded mode works to ensure that data
blocks arrive on disk before any metadata changes which reference those
blocks.  The goal is to provide the performance benefits of the
data=writeback mode while avoiding the potential information disclosure
(after a crash) problems with that mode.  Chris had mentioned in the past
that he would like to merge this code for 2.6.32; the latest posting,
though, suggests that some work still needs to be done, so it might not be
ready in time.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
reflink()
to post comments