# 2.6.32 merge window, part 3 [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 30, 2009 

The 2.6.32 merge window closed on September 27 with the [2.6.32-rc1](http://lwn.net/Articles/354580/) release; this merge window ran a little longer than usual to make up for the distractions of LinuxCon and the Linux Plumbers Conference. Changes merged since [last week's update](http://lwn.net/Articles/353501/) include: 

  * The 9p (Plan9) filesystem has been updated to make use of the FS-cache caching layer. 

  * Control group hierarchies can now have names bound to them. 

  * The `fcntl()` system call supports new `F_SETOWN_EX` and `F_GETOWN_EX` operations. They differ from `F_SETOWN` and `F_GETOWN` in that they direct SIGIO signals to a specific thread within a multi-threaded application. 

  * The [HWPOISON](http://lwn.net/Articles/348886/) subsystem has been merged. 

  * Framebuffer compression support has been added for Intel graphics chipsets. Compression reduces the amount of work involved in driving the display, leading to a claimed 0.5 watt reduction in power consumption. A set of tracepoints has also been added to the Intel graphics driver. 

  * There are new drivers for ADP5588 I2C QWERTY Keypad and IO Expander devices, OpenCores keyboard controllers, Atmel AT42QT2160 touch sensor chips, MELFAS MCS-5000 touchscreen controllers, Maxim MAX7359 key switch controllers, ARM "tightly-coupled memory" areas, Palm Tungsten|C handheld systems, Iskratel Electronics XCEP boards, EMS CPC-USB/ARM7 CAN/USB interfaces, Broadcom 43xx-based SDIO devices, Avionic Design Xanthos watchdog and backlight devices, WM831x PMIC backlight devices, Samsung LMS283GF05 LCDs, Analog Devices ADP5520/ADP5501 MFD PMIC backlight devices, and WM831x PMIC status LEDs. 

  * The `proc_handler` function prototype, used in sysctl handling, has lost its unused `struct file` argument. 




In the end, 8742 non-merge changesets were incorporated in the 2.6.32 merge window.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/2.6.32](/Kernel/Index#Releases-2.6.32)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
