# The 2009 Linux Kernel Summit [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 19, 2009 

The 2009 Linux Kernel Summit was held in Tokyo, Japan on October 19 and 20. Jet-lagged developers from all over the world discussed a wide range of topics. LWN's Jonathan Corbet was there, and has written the following summaries. 

#### Day 1

The sessions held on the first day of the summit were: 

  * [Mini-summit readouts](/Articles/357465/); reports from various mini-summit meetings which have happened over the last six months. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

  * [The state of the scheduler](/Articles/357471/), the kernel subsystem that everybody loves to complain about. 

  * [The end-user panel](/Articles/357477/), wherein Linux users from the enterprise and embedded sectors talk about how Linux could serve them better. 

  * [Regressions](/Articles/357480/). Nobody likes them; are the kernel developers doing better at avoiding and fixing them? 

  * [The future of perf events](/Articles/357481/); a discussion of where this new subsystem is likely to go next. 

  * [LKML volume and related issues](/Articles/357483/). A session slot set aside for lightning talks was really mostly concerned with the linux-kernel mailing list and those who post there. 

  * [Generic device trees](/Articles/357487/). The device tree abstraction has proved helpful in the creation of generic kernels for embedded hardware. This session talked about what a device tree is and why it's useful. 




#### Day 2

The discussions on the second day were: 

  * [Legal issues](/Articles/357652/); a lawyer visits the summit to talk about the software patent threat and how to respond to it. 

  * [How Google uses Linux](/Articles/357658/): the challenges faced by one of our largest and most secretive users. 

  * [Performance regressions](/Articles/357795/): is the kernel getting slower? How do we know and where are the problems coming from? 

  * [Realtime](/Articles/357800/): issues related to the merging of the realtime preemption tree into the mainline. 

  * [Generic architecture support](/Articles/357803/): making it easier to port Linux to new processor architectures. 

  * [Development process issues](/Articles/357805/), including linux-next, staging, merge window rules, and more. 




[![\[Joker\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/conf/ks-jls-09/alan.jpg)](/Articles/357651/) The kernel summit closed with a general feeling that the discussions had gone well. It was also noted that our Japanese hosts had done an exceptional job in supporting the summit and enabling everything to happen; it would not be surprising to see developers agitating for the summit to return to Japan in the near future. 

See also: the obligatory [kernel summit group photo](http://lwn.net/Articles/357651/).   
  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Kernel Summit](/Kernel/Index#Kernel_Summit)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Kernel Summit/2009](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Kernel_Summit-2009)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
