# Another null pointer exploit [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
November 4, 2009 

Back in mid-October, Earl Chew [reported](/Articles/360329/) a null pointer crash in the kernel pipe code. Initial response to his report was somewhat slow, partly because the kernel he was running was based on 2.6.21. Earl took the time to dig through the code and identify the problem, though; it turns out to be an old vulnerability which is still present in current kernels. 

What it comes down to is that there is a race condition in the pipe code. Prior to 2.6.32-rc6, the code which opens a pipe (for write-only access, in this case) looks like: 
    
    
        static int
        pipe_write_open(struct inode *inode, struct file *filp)
        {
    	mutex_lock(&inode->i_mutex);
    	inode->i_pipe->writers++;
    	mutex_unlock(&inode->i_mutex);
    
    	return 0;
        }
    

The problem is that if the final close of this pipe slips in at the wrong time, `inode->i_pipe` may have been set to null. So this is yet another null pointer vulnerability; the rest is just a matter of writing the exploit. That exploit must face the challenge that the window of opportunity is quite short, but computers are very good at continually trying things until something works. 

The [fix](http://git.kernel.org/linus/ad3960243e55320d74195fb85c975e0a8cc4466c) makes the code much more careful about checking the current status of the pipe and refusing new opens if the final close has already happened. Distributors are shipping updates. 

This particular bug is attracting attention because it is in the core kernel and (relatively) straightforward to trigger. But it is far from unique. A quick look at commits since 2.6.31 turns up no fewer than [34 which explicitly fix null pointer dereference bugs](/Articles/360341/). Quite a few more fix things that could be null pointer bugs, and there's no telling how many more were fixed without an explicit mention in the commit title. Null pointer bugs are common, and are likely to remain so for quite some time. 

What is surprising about this bug is that some distributions are still vulnerable to it. We have had the ability to keep null pointer bugs from being exploitable for some time, but certain distributions - generally of the "enterprise" variety - disable that protection by default. Sites running such distributions might want to be sure that they have the vm.mmap_min_addr knob set to a reasonable value; either that or expect to be vulnerable to more null pointer exploits in the future. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Vulnerabilities](/Kernel/Index#Security-Vulnerabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
