# eclone() [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
November 18, 2009 

Developers working to implement a checkpoint/restart capability for Linux want the ability to create a new process with a specific process ID. In the absence of that feature, restarted processes will suddenly find themselves with different PIDs, which can only lead to confusion. To implement explicit PID selection, the checkpoint/restart developers have proposed various extensions to the `clone()` system call with names like `clone_with_pids()` and `clone_extended()`. No version has yet been merged, and the proposed API continues to evolve. 

The latest proposal is called [`eclone()`](http://lwn.net/Articles/361448/); it looks like this: 
    
    
        int eclone(u32 flags_low, struct clone_args *args, int args_size,
    	       pid_t *pids);
    

The `flags_low` argument corresponds to the `flags` argument to the existing `clone()` call, which is running out of space for new flags. The `pids` argument is an optional list of PIDs to apply to the new child process, one for each namespace in which the process appears. Everything else goes into `args`: 
    
    
        struct clone_args {
    	u64 clone_flags_high;
    	u64 child_stack_base;
    	u64 child_stack_size;
    	u64 parent_tid_ptr;
    	u64 child_tid_ptr;
    	u32 nr_pids;
    	u32 reserved0;
    	u64 reserved1;
        };
    

A number of these fields (`child_stack_base`, `child_stack_size`, `parent_tid_ptr`, `child_tid_ptr`) correspond to existing `clone()` arguments. `clone_flags_high` allows the addition of more flags; no new flags are defined in the `eclone()` proposal, though. The length of the `pids` array is given by `nr_pids`, and the `reserved` fields are there for future expansion. 

Comments on the new proposal have been scarce; it may be that the development community has gotten a little tired of seeing these patches over and over. The silence could also mean that there are no objections to this proposal. One big obstacle could remain to the merging of this system call, though: it is there to support the checkpoint/restart facility, which is definitely _not_ ready for merging into the mainline. Getting checkpoint/restart to a completed and maintainable state is likely to take some time; until then, there may be reluctance to add a new system call which does not, yet, have any real-world users.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Checkpointing](/Kernel/Index#Checkpointing)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
