# 2.6.33 merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 9, 2009 

Linus began merging patches for the 2.6.33 development cycle on December 5. The merge window got off to a slow start, but then Linus began to make up for lost time; as of this writing, some 3900 changesets have been merged. 

User-visible changes include: 

  * The ftrace framework has seen a number of improvements, including the ability to trace multiple processes simultaneously, regular expression support in tracing filters, tracing of big kernel lock events, and tracing of accesses and modifications to arbitrary kernel variables. 

  * Perhaps most significantly (for ftrace), the [dynamic probes for ftrace patch set](http://lwn.net/Articles/343766/) has been merged, allowing the placement of arbitrary tracepoints at run time. The "perf" tool has also been extended to be able to place and use dynamic tracepoints. 

  * There are many other enhancements to "perf," including a new framework for benchmark suites, a command to record and analyze kernel memory allocations, and a generic scripting language hook set. 

  * Eric Biederman's [long quest to remove binary `sysctl()`](http://lwn.net/Articles/361453/) support has finally made it into the mainline. 

  * The [`recvmmsg()`](http://lwn.net/Articles/334854/) system call has been added. 

  * The anticipatory I/O scheduler has been removed, in favor of CFQ which is seen as providing a superset of features. 

  * The new, unified [block I/O bandwidth controller](http://lwn.net/Articles/360958/) has been merged. 

  * The networking layer has gained support for [TCP cookie transactions [PDF]](http://www.usenix.org/publications/login/2009-12/openpdfs/metzger.pdf), a mechanism which allows faster, more secure, and more robust initiation of TCP connections. 

  * The [DRBD](http://lwn.net/Articles/329543/) distributed block device has been merged. 

  * New drivers: 

    * **Boards and processors** : ST-Ericsson U8500 boards, Marvell Dove (88AP510) system-on-chip CPUs, Palm Centro 685 phones, and CompuLab CM-T35 boards. 

    * **Networking** : TI High End CAN controllers, Intel Wireless MultiCom 3200 chips, Ralink rt2800 wireless chipsets, Microchip MCP251x SPI CAN controllers, Freescale MSCAN-based CAN controllers, and Solarflare SFC9000 10G Ethernet controllers. 

    * **Sound** : miroSOUND PCM20 radio tuners, Texas Instruments TPA6130A2 stereo headphone amplifiers, TI tlv320dac33 codecs, Asahi Kasei AK4113 and AK4671 codecs, WM8580 based audio subsystems on SMDK64xx systems, Wolfson Micro WM8711/L sound devices, and Raumfeld audio adapters. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : GRLIB APBUART serial ports, Oki MSM6242 realtime clock chips, and Ricoh RP5C01 RTCs. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * There is a new `unreachable()` macro which can be used to mark code which will never be executed. Its main application is in macros like `BUG()`. 

  * New security module hooks, intended for pathname-based modules, have been added to check `chmod()`, `chown()`, and `chroot()`. 

  * There is a new RCU variant, called "tiny RCU," which is meant for non-SMP situations where memory footprint must be minimized. 

  * `printk_ratelimit()` can, once again, be used in atomic context. (Note, though, that there are developers who would like to eliminate this function in favor of some sort of more local rate limiting). 

  * The creation of nearly-identical tracepoints has been made significantly easier. `TRACE_EVENT_TEMPLATE()` has a syntax identical to `TRACE_EVENT()`, but it creates a template which can be used by the simpler `DEFINE_EVENT()` macro to create specific tracepoints. The code gets simpler, and, as a side benefit, the kernel gets smaller. 




The merge window should stay open for at least another week; expect quite a bit more code to be incorporated for 2.6.33 before the window closes.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/2.6.33](/Kernel/Index#Releases-2.6.33)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
