# 2.6.33 merge window part 2 [LWN.net]

> **Ready to give LWN a try?**
> 
> With a subscription to LWN, you can stay current with what is happening in the Linux and free-software community and take advantage of subscriber-only site features. We are pleased to offer you **[a free trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-trial/claim)** , no credit card required, so that you can see for yourself. Please, join us! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 16, 2009 

Since [last week's summary](http://lwn.net/Articles/365443/), there have been over 4200 patches merged for the 2.6.33 development cycle. That makes a total of 8152 patches for this merge window, as of this writing. 

User-visible changes include: 

  * If there are any remaining reiserfs users out there: that filesystem has seen a major rework of its internal locking to eliminate use of the big kernel lock. 

  * The Super-H architecture has gained perf events support for a number of system types. 

  * The exofs filesystem (for object storage devices) now has multi-device mirror support. 

  * There is a new "discard" mount option for ext4 filesystems, controlling whether ext4 issues TRIM commands for newly-freed space. It defaults to off due to fears about how well this feature will really work once hardware begins to support it. 

  * It is now possible to configure a kernel without ext2 or ext3 support, but still mount filesystems with those formats using the ext4 code. 

  * The Nouveau reverse-engineered NVIDIA driver has been merged, but without the accompanying firmware; see [this article](http://lwn.net/Articles/366648/) for more information. 

  * The "ramzswap" device, formerly known as [compcache](http://lwn.net/Articles/334649/), has been merged into the staging tree. 

  * There is now support for the "BATMAN" mesh network protocol in the staging tree. 

  * The "perf" tool now has a "diff" mode which will calculate the change in performance between two different runs and generate a report. 

  * The semantics for the `O_SYNC` and `O_DSYNC` open-time flags have been rationalized, as described in [this article](http://lwn.net/Articles/350219/). 

  * The MD layer now supports barrier requests for all RAID types. The device mapper, too, has improved barrier support. 

  * The [snapshot merge target](http://lwn.net/Articles/363575/) for the device mapper has been merged. 

  * An extensive set of tracepoints has been added to the XFS filesystem, allowing fine-grained visibility into most aspects of its operation. 

  * Memory pages shared with the [kernel shared memory (KSM)](http://lwn.net/Articles/330589/) mechanism are now swappable. 

  * New hardware support: 

    * **Block devices** : The VMware paravirtualized SCSI HBA device, LSI 3ware SAS/SATA-RAID controllers, PMC-Sierra SPC 8001 SAS/SATA based host adapters, Apple PowerMac/PowerBook internal 'MacIO' IDE controllers, Blackfin Secure Digital host controllers, TI DAVINCI multimedia card interfaces, and BCM Reference Board NAND flash controllers. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : Dynapro serial touchscreens, Altera University Program PS/2 ports, Samsung S3C2410 touchscreens, National Semiconductor LM73 temperature sensors, Nuvoton NUC900 series SPI controllers SuperH MSIOF SPI controllers, OMAP SPI 100K master controllers, ST-Ericsson AB4500 Mixed Signal Power management chips, Freescale MC13783 realtime clocks, Freescale MC13783 touchscreen devices, SHARP LQ035Q1DH02 TFT displays, and TI BQ32000 I2C realtime clocks. 

    * **Networking** : RealTek RTL8192U Wireless LAN NICs, Agere Systems HERMES II Wireless PC Cards (Model 0110), and Analog Devices Blackfin on-chip CAN controllers. 

    * **Sound** : AD525x digital potentiometers and Texas Instruments DAC7512 digital-to-analog converters. 

    * **Systems and processors** : Neuros OSD 2.0 devices, Nintendo GameCubes, Freescale P1020RDB processors, Freescale p4080ds reference boards, Arcom/Eurotech ZEUS single-board SBC systems, ATNGW100 mkII Network Gateway boards, and Acvilon BF561 boards. 

    * **USB** : Xilinx USB host controllers and OMAP34xx USBHOST 3 port EHCI controllers. 

    * **Video4Linux** : OmniVision OV2610, OV3610, and OV96xx sensors, Sharp RJ54N1CB0C sensors, E3C EC168 DVB-T USB2.0 receivers, E3C EC100 DVB-T demodulators, Maxim MAX2165 silicon tuners, Aptina MT9T112 cameras, and DiBcom DiB0090 tuners. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The scsi_debug module can now emulate "thin provisioning" devices. 

  * The `detect()` callback in `struct i2c_driver` has lost the unused `kind` parameter. Also, `struct i2c_client_address_data` is no more; address lists are represented with simple `unsigned short` arrays instead. 

  * The [spinlock renaming patch](http://lwn.net/Articles/365863/) has been applied. Developers working near low-level code will see the new `arch_spin_lock_t` type being used with non-sleeping (even in the realtime tree) locks. 

  * Video4Linux2 has [a new subdevice API](http://git.kernel.org/linus/9a74251d8bee7a25fee89a0be3ccea73e01c1a05), called media-bus, intended to help in the negotiation of image formats between the sensor and the controller. 

  * There is a new mechanism for grabbing and saving kernel messages on a system crash; see [this article](http://lwn.net/Articles/366987/) for more information. 

  * The per-CPU variable allocator has been replaced, and there is a new set of operations for working with these variables; see [this article](http://lwn.net/Articles/366994/) for a brief introduction. 




This merge window should close in the very near future, so the 2.6.33 kernel is, at this point, close to being feature-complete. Any final additions will be noted in next week's edition.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/2.6.33](/Kernel/Index#Releases-2.6.33)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
