# kmsg_dumper [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 16, 2009 

Nice new tracing tools notwithstanding, kernel developers still tend to reach for `printk()` when trying to figure out problems. But one need not work on kernel code for very long before running into an unpleasant fact: the most interesting stuff is often printed immediately before a crash, but, for many kinds of problems, the death of the system can prevent the output of those crucial lines. It's no fun to stare at a hung system, knowing that the information needed to find the problem is probably trapped in a buffer somewhere in that system's memory. 

2.6.33 will contain a new mechanism designed to help get that last bit of information out of a dying system's clutches. The developer need only set up a new "kmsg dumper" along these lines: 
    
    
        #include <linux/kmsg_dump.h>
    
        struct kmsg_dumper {
    	void (*dump)(struct kmsg_dumper *dumper, enum kmsg_dump_reason reason,
    			const char *s1, unsigned long l1,
    			const char *s2, unsigned long l2);
    	struct list_head list;
    	int registered;
        };
    

The `dump()` function will be called in the event of a crash; the two arguments `s1` and `s2` will have pointers to the data in the kernel's output buffer. Two pointers are needed due to the circular nature of this buffer; `s1` will point to the older set of messages. 

Registering and unregistering this function is a matter of calling: 
    
    
        int kmsg_dump_register(struct kmsg_dumper *dumper);
        int kmsg_dump_unregister(struct kmsg_dumper *dumper);
    

In the 2.6.33 kernel, the "mtdoops" module has been reworked to use this new mechanism to save crash data to a flash device.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [kmsg_dumper](/Kernel/Index#kmsg_dumper)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
