# A module for crashing the kernel [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 26, 2010 

Normally, a kernel which doesn't crash is considered to be a good thing. It can be a source of true frustration, though, for those who want to see the system go down in flames. The reliability of the system means that somebody waiting for a crash may grow old indeed in the process. 

Simon Kagstrom has heard the pain expressed by such users; in response, he has posted [a kernel module](http://lwn.net/Articles/371208/) just for people who want to be able to destroy their systems on demand. This module creates a directory (`provoke_crash`) in debugfs, filled with a number of useful files. For those with simple needs, a write to `bugon` results in a straightforward `BUG()` call. Users with more discriminating tastes can write to `null_dereference` to cause a null pointer dereference, `overwrite_allocation` to write beyond a heap allocation, or `corrupt_stack` to overwrite the stack. And truly kinky users can go for `oops_interrupt_context` to get a null dereference in softirq mode, `write_after_free` to step on freed memory, or `unaligned_load_store` to perform badly-aligned memory operations. 

Needless to say, this isn't a module one would ordinarily want to leave loaded into a production system; it's better kept in a secret place and pulled out after the kids go to sleep. Unless, of course, you have a real use for it; Simon has been employing it to make sure that [`kmsg_dump()`](http://lwn.net/Articles/366987/) does the right thing in various crash scenarios. For most developers, though, work is normally dominated by the need to _avoid_ crashes; since they'll have little use for this feature, it's not clear that this little module will ever make its way into the mainline.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development tools](/Kernel/Index#Development_tools)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
