# Open by handle [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
February 23, 2010
Most Linux users never deal directly with file handles; indeed, most may
not even know they exist.  Of the rest, the bulk will have an experience
limited to the cheery "stale file handle" message seen by NFS users at
horribly inopportune times.  In fact, a file handle is just a means by
which a file can be uniquely identified within a filesystem.  Handles are
used in NFS, for example, to represent an open file in a way which allows
the server to be almost entirely stateless.  Handles are not normally used
by, or even available to user-space applications.
Aneesh Kumar is trying to change that situation with
a short patch series
adding two
new system calls:
int name_to_handle(const char *name, struct file_handle *handle);
    int open_by_handle(struct file_handle *handle, int flags);
The first takes the given
name
and looks up the associated file
handle, which is returned in the
handle
structure.  That handle
can then be passed to
open_by_handle()
to get an open file
descriptor for the file.  Only privileged users can call
open_by_handle()
; otherwise it could be possible for a malicious
local user to bypass the normal permission checks on the directories in the
path to a specific file.
Why would an application developer want to open a file in two steps instead
of just calling
open()
?  It comes down to the ability to write
filesystem servers that run in user space.  Such a server could use
name_to_handle()
to generate handles for files on the underlying
filesystem; those handles are then passed to the filesystem's clients.  At
some future time, the client can pass the handle back to actually open the
file.  This type of feature is also
already
used with the XFS filesystem
for backup and restore operations and with a hierarchical storage
management system.
Discussion of these system calls has been minimal, thus far.  It does seem
that some work will be needed still to better describe what a file handle
really is, and, in particular, what its expected lifetime will be.  Without
some clarity in that area, it will be hard to write applications which can
make proper use of file handles.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
File handle
Kernel
Filesystems/Network
to post comments