# Huge pages part 3: Administration [LWN.net]

March 3, 2010
This article was contributed by Mel Gorman
[
Editor's note: this is the third part in Mel Gorman's series on the use
of huge pages in Linux.  For those who missed them, a look at
part 1
and
part 2
is recommended
before diving into this installment.
]
In this chapter, the setup and the administration of huge pages within the
system is addressed.
Part 2 discussed the different interfaces between user and kernel space
such as hugetlbfs and shared memory. For an application to use these
interfaces, though, the system must first be properly configured. 
Use of hugetlbfs requires only that the filesystem must be mounted;
shared memory needs additional
tuning and huge pages must also be allocated.  Huge pages can be statically
allocated as part of a pool early in the lifetime of the system or the pool
can be allowed to grow dynamically as required. Libhugetlbfs provides a
hugeadm utility that removes much of the tedium involved in these tasks.
1 Identifying Available Page Sizes
Since kernel
2.6.27
, Linux has supported more than one huge page
size if the underlying hardware does.  There will be one directory per page
size supported in
/sys/kernel/mm/hugepages
and the "default" huge
page size will be stored in the
Hugepagesize
field in
/proc/meminfo
.
The default huge page size can be important. While hugetlbfs can specify the
page size at mount time, the same option is not available for shared memory or
MAP_HUGETLB. This can be important when using 1G pages on AMD or 16G pages on
Power 5+ and later.  The default huge page size can be set either with the last
hugepagesz=
option on the kernel command line (see below) or
explicitly with
default_hugepagesz=
.
Libhugetlbfs provides two means of identifying the huge
page sizes. The first is using the
pagesize
utility with
the
-H
switch printing the available huge page sizes and
-a
showing all page sizes. The programming equivalent are the
gethugepagesizes()
and
getpagesizes()
calls.
2 Huge Page Pool
Due to the inability to swap huge pages, none are allocated by default,
so a pool must be configured with either a static or a dynamic size. The
static size is the number of huge pages that are pre-allocated and guaranteed
to be available for use by applications. Where it is known
in advance how many huge pages are required, the static size should be set.
The size of the static pool may be set in a number of ways. First, it may be
set at boot-time using the
hugepages=
kernel boot parameter. If
there are multiple huge page sizes, the
hugepagesz=
parameter
must be used and interleaved with
hugepages=
as described in
Documentation/kernel-parameters
. For example, Power 5+ and later
support multiple page sizes including 64K and 16M; both could be configured
with:
hugepagesz=64k hugepages=128 hugepagesz=16M hugepages=4
Second, the default huge page pool size can be set with the
vm.nr_hugepages
sysctl, which, again, tunes the default huge page
pool. Third, it may be set via sysfs by finding the appropriate
nr_hugepages
virtual file below
/sys/kernel/mm/hugepages
.
Knowing the exact huge page requirements in advance may not be possible.
For example, the huge page requirements may be expected to vary
throughout the lifetime of the system. In this case, the maximum number
of additional huge pages that should be allocated is specified with the
vm.nr_overcommit_hugepages
. When a huge page pool does not have
sufficient pages to satisfy a request for huge pages, an attempt to allocate up to
nr_overcommit_hugepages
is made.  If an allocation fails,
the result will be that
mmap()
will fail to avoid page fault
failures as described in
Huge Page Fault
Behaviour
in part 1.
It is easiest to tune the pools with
hugeadm
.  The
--pool-pages-min
argument specifies the minimum number of huge
pages that are guaranteed to be available. The
--pool-pages-max
argument specifies the maximum number of huge pages that will exist in the
system, whether statically or dynamically allocated. The page size can be
specified or it can be simply
DEFAULT
. The amount to allocate
can be specified as either a number of huge pages or a size requirement.
In the following example, run on an x86 machine, the 4M huge page pool is being
tuned. As 4M also happens to be the default huge page size, it could also
have been specified as
DEFAULT:32M
and
DEFAULT:64M
respectively.
$ hugeadm --pool-pages-min 4M:32M
    $ hugeadm --pool-pages-max 4M:64M
    $ hugeadm --pool-list
          Size  Minimum  Current  Maximum  Default
       4194304        8        8       16        *
To confirm the huge page pools are tuned to the satisfaction of requirements,
hugeadm --pool-list
will report on the minimum, maximum and
current usage of huge pages of each size supported by the system.
3 Mounting HugeTLBFS
To access the special filesystem described in
HugeTLBFS
in part 2, it
must first be mounted. What may be less obvious is that this is required to
benefit from the use of the allocation API,  or to automatically back
segments with huge pages (as also described in part 2). The default huge page
size is used for the mount if the
pagesize=
is not used. The
following mounts two filesystem instances with different page sizes as supported
on Power 5+.
$ mount -t hugetlbfs /mnt/hugetlbfs-default
  $ mount -t hugetlbfs /mnt/hugetlbfs-64k -o pagesize=64K
Ordinarily it would be the responsibility of the administrator to set the
permissions on this filesystem appropriately.
hugeadm
provides
a range of different options for creating mount points with different permissions.
The list of options are as follows and are self-explanatory.
--create-mounts
Creates a mount point for each available
                            huge page size on this system under
/var/lib/hugetlbfs
.
--create-user-mounts <user>
Creates a mount point for each available huge
                            page size under
/var/lib/hugetlbfs/<user>
usable by user <user>.
--create-group-mounts <group>
Creates a mount point for each available huge
                            page size under
/var/lib/hugetlbfs/<group>
usable by group <group>.
--create-global-mounts
Creates a mount point for each available huge
                            page size under
/var/lib/hugetlbfs/global
usable by anyone.
It is up to the discretion of the administrator whether to call
hugeadm
from a system initialization script or to create
appropriate
fstab
entries. If it is unclear what mount points
already exist, use
--list-all-mounts
to list all current
hugetlbfs
mounts and the options used.
3.1 Quotas
A little-used feature of
hugetlbfs
is quota support which
limits the number of huge pages that a filesystem instance can use even if
more huge pages are available in the system. The expected use case would
be to limit the number of huge pages available to a user or group. While
it is not currently supported by
hugeadm
, the quota can be set
with the
size=
option at mount time.
4 Enabling Shared Memory Use
There are two tunables that are relevant to the use of huge pages with shared
memory. The first is the sysctl
kernel.shmmax
kernel parameter
configured permanently in
/etc/sysctl.conf
or temporarily in
/proc/sys/kernel/shmmax
. The second is the sysctl
vm.hugetlb_shm_group
which stores which group ID (GID)
is allowed to create shared memory segments. For example, lets say a JVM was to
use shared memory with huge pages and ran as the user JVM with UID 1500 and GID
3000, then the value of this tunable should be 3000.
Again,
hugeadm
is able to tune both of these parameters
with the switches
--set-recommended-shmmax
and
--set-shm-group
. As the recommended value is calculated
based on the size of the static and dynamic huge page pools, this should
be called after the pools have been configured.
5 Huge Page Allocation Success Rates
If the huge page pool is statically allocated at boot-time, then this
section will not be relevant as the huge pages are guaranteed to exist. In
the event the system needs to dynamically allocate huge pages throughout
its lifetime, then external fragmentation may be a problem.
"External fragmentation" in this context refers to the inability of the
system to allocate a huge page even if enough memory is free overall because the
free memory is not physically contiguous. There
are two means by which external fragmentation can be controlled, greatly
increasing the success rate of huge page allocations.
The first means is by tuning
vm.min_free_kbytes
to a
higher value which helps the kernel's fragmentation-avoidance mechanism.
The exact value depends on the type of system, the number of NUMA nodes
and the huge page size, but
hugeadm
can calculate and set it
with the
--set-recommended-min_free_kbytes
switch. If
necessary, the effectiveness of this step can be measured by using the
trace_mm_page_alloc_extfrag
tracepoint and
ftrace
although how to do it is beyond the scope of this article.
While the static huge page pool is guaranteed to be available as it has
already been allocated, tuning
min_free_kbytes
improves the
success rate when dynamically growing the huge page pool beyond its minimum
size. The static pool sets the lower bound but there is no guaranteed upper
bound on the number of huge pages that are available. For
example, an administrator might request a minimum pool of 1G and a maximum
pool 8G but fragmentation may mean that the real upper bound is 4G.
If a guaranteed upper bound is required, a memory partition can be created
using either the
kernelcore=
or
movablecore=
switch
at boot time. These switches create a “Movable” zone that can be seen in
/proc/zoneinfo
or
/proc/buddyinfo
. Only pages that
the kernel can migrate or reclaim exist in this zone. By default, huge pages
are not allocated from this zone but it can be enabled by setting either
vm.hugepages_treat_as_movable
or using the
hugeadm
--enable-zone-movable
switch.
6 Summary
In this chapter, four sets of system tunables were described. These relate
to the allocation of huge pages, use of hugetlbfs filesystems, the use of
shared memory, and simplifying the allocation of huge pages when dynamic pool
sizing is in use.  Once the administrator has made a choice, it should be
implemented as part of a system initialization script. In the next chapter,
it will be shown how some common benchmarks can be easily converted to use
huge pages.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Huge pages
Kernel
Memory management/Huge pages
GuestArticles
Gorman, Mel
to post comments