# A "live mode" for perf [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Jake Edge**  
April 7, 2010 

The perf tracing tool has evolved quickly. When last we looked, Tom Zanussi had [added Python and Perl scripting to perf](http://lwn.net/Articles/373842/). Next up would seem to be [perf "live mode"](http://lwn.net/Articles/381634/), where perf no longer requires two steps: record the data, then analyze. Live mode will allow `perf trace record` and `perf trace report` to operate via a pipe, which allows instantaneous, as well as continuously updating (_a la_ `top`), output. 

So that no existing perf users need to change their scripts, Zanussi only added the new capabilities when perf recognizes that its `record` output is going to stdout or `report` input is coming from stdin. In that case, perf handles the data through a pipe, and uses special synthesized events to provide header information. This will also allow perf to operate over the network by piping its `record` output to netcat, and then reading it via netcat on another system and piping it into `report`. 

All of the scripts that are installed in the standard perf location (i.e. those which are listed in `perf trace -l`) are automatically able to be run in live mode: 
    
    
      $ perf trace syscall-counts
    

will run both ends of the the syscall-counts script with a pipe in between, a more usable shorthand for: 
    
    
      $ perf trace record syscall-counts -o - | perf trace report syscall-counts -i -
    

which itself is shorthand for: 
    
    
      perf record -c 1 -f -a -M -R -e raw_syscalls:sys_enter -o - | \
      perf trace -i - -s ~/libexec/perf-core/scripts/python/syscall-counts.py
    

Zanussi also included several sample `top`-style scripts that can be used to monitor read/write or system call activity updated every three seconds. It looks to be a very useful addition to perf, which is rapidly becoming the "swiss army knife" of kernel monitoring.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Performance monitoring](/Kernel/Index#Performance_monitoring)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
