# Using the TRACE_EVENT() macro (Part 3) [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

April 21, 2010

This article was contributed by Steven Rostedt

Tracepoints within the kernel facilitate the analysis of how the kernel performs. The flow of critical information can be followed and examined in order to debug a latency problem, or to simply figure out better ways to tune the system. The core kernel tracepoints, like the scheduler and interrupt tracepoints, let the user see when and how events take place inside the kernel. Module developers can also take advantage of tracepoints; if their users or customers have problems, the developer can have them enable the tracepoints and analyze the situation. This article will explain how to add tracepoints in modules that are outside of the core kernel code. 

In [Part 1](http://lwn.net/Articles/379903/), the process of creating a tracepoint in the core kernel was explained. [Part 2](http://lwn.net/Articles/381064) explained how to consolidate tracepoints with the use of `DECLARE_EVENT_CLASS()` and `DEFINE_EVENT()` and went over the field macros of `TP_STRUCT__entry`, and the function helpers of `TP_printk()`. This article takes a look at how to add tracepoints outside of the core kernel, which can be used by modules or architecture specific code. A brief look at some of the magic behind the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro, and a few more examples to get your feet wet with using tracepoints. 

#### Defining a trace header outside of `include/trace/events`

For tracepoints in modules or in architecture-specific directories, having trace header files in the global `include/trace/events` directory may clutter it. The result would be to put files like `mips_cpu.h` or `arm_cpu.h`, which are not necessary for the core kernel, into that directory. It would end up something like the old `include/asm-*/` setup. Also, if tracepoints went into staging drivers, putting staging header files in the core kernel code base would be a bad design. 

Because trace header files are handled very differently than other header files, the best solution is to have the header files placed at the location where they are used. For example, the XFS tracepoints are located in the XFS subdirectory in `fs/xfs/xfs_trace.h`. But, some of the magic of `define_trace.h` is that it must be able to include the trace file that included it (the reason for `TRACE_HEADER_MULTI_READ`). As explained in Part 1, the trace header files start with the cpp conditional: 
    
    
       #if !defined(_TRACE_SCHED_H) || defined(TRACE_HEADER_MULTI_READ)
       #define _TRACE_SCHED_H
    

Part 1 explained that one and only one of the C files that include a particular trace header will define `CREATE_TRACE_POINTS` before including the trace header. That activates the `define_trace.h` that the trace header file includes. The `define_trace.h` file will include the header again, but will first define `TRACE_HEADER_MULTI_READ`. As the cpp condition shows, this define will allow the contents of the trace header to be read again. 

For `define_trace.h` to include the trace header file, it must be able to find it. To do this, some changes need to be made to the `Makefile` where the trace file is included, and that file will need to tell `define_trace.h` not to look for it in the default location (`include/trace/events`). 

To tell `define_trace.h` where to find the trace header, the `Makefile` must define the path to the location of the trace file. One method is to extend `CFLAGS` to include the path: 
    
    
        EXTRA_CFLAGS = -I$(src)
    

But that affects CFLAGS for all files that the `Makefile` builds. If it is desired to only modify the the CFLAGS for the C file that has the `CREATE_TRACE_POINTS` defined, then the method used by the `net/mac80211/Makefile` can be used: 
    
    
       CFLAGS_driver-trace.o = -I$(src)
    

The `driver-trace.c` file contains the `CREATE_TRACE_POINTS` define and the include of `driver-trace.h` that contains the `TRACE_EVENT()` macros for the mac80211 tracepoints. 

To demonstrate how to add tracepoints to a module, I wrote a simple module, called `sillymod`, which just creates a thread that wakes up every second and performs a printk and records the number of times that it has done so. I will look at the relevant portions of the files, but the full file contents are also available: [module](http://lwn.net/Articles/383963/), [Makefile](http://lwn.net/Articles/383962/), the [module with tracepoint](http://lwn.net/Articles/383964/), and the [trace header file](http://lwn.net/Articles/383965/). 

The first step is to create the desired tracepoints. The trace header file is created the same way as the core trace headers described in Part 1, with a few more additions. The header must start by defining the system where all tracepoints within the file will belong to: 
    
    
       #undef TRACE_SYSTEM
       #define TRACE_SYSTEM silly
    

This module creates a trace system called `silly`. Then the special cpp condition is included: 
    
    
       #if !defined(_SILLY_TRACE_H) || defined(TRACE_HEADER_MULTI_READ)
       #define _SILLY_TRACE_H
    

The `linux/tracepoint.h` file is included, and finally the `TRACE_EVENT()` macros; one in this example: 
    
    
       #include <linux/tracepoint.h>
    
       TRACE_EVENT(me_silly,
    
    	TP_PROTO(unsigned long time, unsigned long count),
    
    	TP_ARGS(time, count),
    
    	TP_STRUCT__entry(
    		__field(	unsigned long,	time	)
    		__field(	unsigned long,	count	)
    	),
    
    	TP_fast_assign(
    		__entry->time = jiffies;
    		__entry->count = count;
    	),
    
    	TP_printk("time=%lu count=%lu", __entry->time, __entry->count)
       );
    
       #endif /* _SILLY_TRACE_H */
    

The above is the same as what was described in Part 1 for core kernel tracepoints. After the `#endif` things become a bit different. Before including the `define_trace.h` file the following is added: 
    
    
       /* This part must be outside protection */
       #undef TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH
       #define TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH .
       #define TRACE_INCLUDE_FILE silly-trace
       #include <trace/define_trace.h>
    

The `TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH` tells `define_trace.h` not to look in the default location (`include/trace/events`) for the trace header, but instead look in the include search path. By default, `define_trace.h` will include a file defined by `TRACE_SYSTEM`. The `TRACE_INCLUDE_FILE` tells `define_trace.h` that the trace header is called `silly-trace.h` (The `.h` is automatically added to the end of `TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH`). 

To add the tracepoint to the module, the module now includes the trace header. Before including the trace header it must also define `CREATE_TRACE_POINTS`: 
    
    
       #define CREATE_TRACE_POINTS
       #include "silly-trace.h"
    

The tracepoint can now be added to the code. 
    
    
        set_current_state(TASK_INTERRUPTIBLE);
        schedule_timeout(HZ);
        printk("hello! %lu\n", count);
        **trace_me_silly(jiffies, count);**
        count++;
    

Finally the `Makefile` must set the `CFLAGS` to have the includes include the local directory where the `silly-trace.h` file resides. 
    
    
       CFLAGS_sillymod-event.o = -I$(src)
    

One might believe the following would also work without modifying the `Makefile`, if the module resided in the kernel tree: 
    
    
       #define TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH ../../path/to/trace/header
    

Using a path name in `TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH` other than '.' runs the risk of containing a macro. For example, if XFS defined `TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH` as `../../fs/xfs/linux-2.6/xfs_trace.h`, it would fail. That is because the Linux build `#define`s the name `linux` to nothing, which would make the path be `../../fs/xfs/**-2.6** /xfs_trace.h`. 

Now the trace event is available. 
    
    
       [mod] # insmod sillymod-event.ko
       [mod] # cd /sys/kernel/debug/tracing
       [tracing] # ls events
       block   ext4    header_event  i915  jbd2  module  sched  skb       timer
       enable  ftrace  header_page   irq   kmem  power   **silly**  syscalls  workqueue
       [tracing] # ls events/silly
       enable  filter  me_silly
       [tracing] # echo 1 > events/silly/me_silly/enable
       [tracing] # cat trace
       # tracer: nop
       #
       #           TASK-PID    CPU#    TIMESTAMP  FUNCTION
       #              | |       |          |         |
           silly-thread-5377  [000]  1802.845581: me_silly: time=4304842209 count=10
           silly-thread-5377  [000]  1803.845008: me_silly: time=4304843209 count=11
           silly-thread-5377  [000]  1804.844451: me_silly: time=4304844209 count=12
           silly-thread-5377  [000]  1805.843886: me_silly: time=4304845209 count=13
    

Once `define_trace.h` file can safely locate the trace header, the module's tracepoints can be created. To understand why all this manipulation is needed, a look at how `define_trace.h` is implemented may clarify things a bit. 

#### A look inside the magic of `TRACE_EVENT()`

For those that dare to jump into the mystical world of the C preprocessor, take a look into `include/trace/ftrace.h`. But be warned, what you find there may leave you a bit loony, or at least think that the ones that wrote that code were a bit loony (in which case, you may be right). The `include/trace/define_trace.h` file does some basic set up for the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro, but for a trace to take advantage of it, it must have a header file in `define_trace.h` to do the real work (as do Ftrace and perf). 

#### cpp tricks and treats

While I was working on my Masters, a professor showed me a trick with cpp that lets one map strings to enums using the same data: 
    
    
       #define DOGS { C(JACK_RUSSELL), C(BULL_TERRIER), C(ITALIAN_GREYHOUND) }
       #undef C
       #define C(a) ENUM_##a
       enum dog_enums DOGS;
       #undef C
       #define C(a) #a
       char *dog_strings[] = DOGS;
       char *dog_to_string(enum dog_enums dog)
       {
               return dog_strings[dog];
       }
    

The trick is that the macro `DOGS` contains a sub-macro `C()` that we can redefine and change the behavior of `DOGS`. This concept is key to how the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro works. All the sub-macros within `TRACE_EVENT()` can be redefined and cause the `TRACE_EVENT()` to be used to create different code that uses the same information. Part 1 described the requirements needed to create a tracepoint. One set of data (in the `TRACE_EVENT()` definition) must be able to do several things. Using this cpp trick, it is able to accomplish just that. 

The tracepoint code created by Mathieu Desnoyers required a `DECLARE_TRACE(name, proto, args)` be defined in a header file, and in some C file `DEFINE_TRACE(name)` was used. `TRACE_EVENT()` now does both jobs. In `include/linux/tracepoint.h`: 
    
    
       #define TRACE_EVENT(name, proto, args, struct, assign, print)	\
            DECLARE_TRACE(name, PARAMS(proto), PARAMS(args))
    

The `PARAMS()` macro lets `proto` and `args` contain commas and not be mistaken as multiple parameters of `DECLARE_TRACE()`. Since the `tracepoint.h` must be included in all trace headers, this makes the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro fulfill the first part of the tracepoint creation. When a C file defines `CREATE_TRACE_POINTS` before including a trace header, the `define_trace.h` becomes active and performs: 
    
    
       #undef TRACE_EVENT
       #define TRACE_EVENT(name, proto, args, tstruct, assign, print)	\
            DEFINE_TRACE(name)
    

That is not enough, however, because the `define_trace.h` is declared after the `TRACE_EVENT()` macros are used. For this code to have an impact, the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro must be included again. The `define_trace.h` does some nasty C preprocessor obfuscation to be able to include the file that just included it: 
    
    
       #define TRACE_HEADER_MULTI_READ
       #include TRACE_INCLUDE(TRACE_INCLUDE_FILE)
    

The defining of the `TRACE_HEADER_MULTI_READ` will let the trace header be read again (and this is why it is needed in the first place). The `TRACE_INCLUDE(TRACE_INCLUDE_FILE)` is more cpp macro tricks that will include the file that included it. As explained in previous articles, this macro will use either `TRACE_SYSTEM.h` or `TRACE_INCLUDE_FILE.h` if that is defined, and will include the file from `include/trace/events/` if `TRACE_INCLUDE_PATH` is not defined. I'll spare the reader the ugliness of the macros to accomplish this. For the more masochistic reader, feel free to look at the `include/trace/define_trace.h` file directly. When the file is included again, the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro will be processed again, but with its new meaning. 

The above explains how tracepoints are created. It only creates the tracepoint itself, and it does nothing to add it to a tracer's infrastructure. For Ftrace, this is where the `ftrace.h` file inside the `define_trace.h` comes into play. (Warning, the `ftrace.h` file is even more bizarre than `define_trace.h`). The macros in `ftrace.h` create the files and directories found in `tracing/events`. `ftrace.h` uses the same tricks explained earlier of redefining the macros within the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro as well as redefining the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro itself. How `ftrace.h` works is beyond the scope of this article, but feel free to read it directly, if you don't have any allergies to backslashes. 

#### Playing with trace events

If you change directories to the debugfs filesystem mount point (usually `/sys/kernel/debug`) and take a look inside `tracing/events` you will see all of the trace event systems defined in your kernel (i.e. the trace headers that defined `TRACE_SYSTEM`). 
    
    
       [tracing] # ls events
       block  enable  ftrace  header_event  header_page  irq       kmem  module
       power  sched   skb     syscalls      timer        workqueue
    

As mentioned in Part 2, the `enable` files are used to enable a tracepoint. The `enable` file in the `events` directory can enable or disable all events in the system, the `enable` file in one of the system's directories can enable or disable all events within the system, and the `enable` file within the specific event directory can enable or disable that event. 

Note, by writing '1' into any of the `enable` files will enable all events within that directory and below. Writing a '0' will disable all events within that directory and below. 

One nice feature about events is that they also show up in the Ftrace tracers. If an event is enabled while a tracer is running, those events will show up in the trace. Enabling events can make the [function tracer](http://lwn.net/Articles/370423/) even more informative: 
    
    
       [tracing] # echo 1 > events/sched/enable
       [tracing] # echo function > current_tracer
       [tracing] # head -15 trace
       # tracer: function
       #
       #           TASK-PID    CPU#    TIMESTAMP  FUNCTION
       #              | |       |          |         |
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236400: task_of <-update_curr
    **Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236401: sched_stat_runtime: task: Xorg:1608 runtime: 402851 [ns], vruntime: 153144994503 [ns]**
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236402: account_group_exec_runtime <-update_curr
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236402: list_add <-enqueue_entity
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236403: place_entity <-enqueue_entity
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236403: task_of <-enqueue_entity
    **Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236404: sched_stat_sleep: task: gnome-terminal:1864 sleep: 639071 [ns]**
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236405: __enqueue_entity <-enqueue_entity
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236406: hrtick_start_fair <-enqueue_task_fair
    **Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236407: sched_wakeup: task gnome-terminal:1864 [120] success=1 [001]**
                   Xorg-1608  [001]  1695.236408: check_preempt_curr <-try_to_wake_up
    

Combining the events with tricks from the function graph tracer, we can find interrupt latencies, and which interrupts are responsible for long latencies. 
    
    
       [tracing] # echo do_IRQ > set_ftrace_filter
       [tracing] # echo 1 > events/irq/irq_handler_entry/enable
       [tracing] # echo function_graph > current_tracer
       [tracing] # cat trace
       # tracer: function_graph
       #
       # CPU  DURATION                  FUNCTION CALLS
       # |     |   |                     |   |   |   |
        0)   ==========> |
        0)               |  do_IRQ() {
        0)               |  /* irq_handler_entry: irq=30 handler=iwl3945 */
        0)   ==========> |
        0)               |    do_IRQ() {
        0)               |      /* irq_handler_entry: irq=30 handler=iwl3945 */
        0) + 22.965 us   |    }
        0)   <========== |
        0) ! 148.135 us  |  }
        0)   <========== |
        0)   ==========> |
        0)               |  do_IRQ() {
        0)               |  /* irq_handler_entry: irq=1 handler=i8042 */
        0) + 45.347 us   |  }
        0)   <========== |
    

Writing `do_IRQ` into `set_ftrace_filter` makes the function tracer only trace the `do_IRQ()` function. Then the `irq_handler_entry` tracepoint is activated and the `function_graph` tracer is selected. Since the `function graph` tracer shows the time a function executed, we can see the how long the interrupts ran for. But the function graph tracer only shows that the `do_IRQ()` function ran, but not which interrupt it executed. By enabling the `irq_handler_entry` event, we now see which interrupt was running. The above shows that my laptop's `iwl3945` interrupt that handles the wireless communication caused a 148 microsecond latency! 

#### Conclusion

Tracepoints are a very powerful tool, but to make them useful, they must be flexible and trivial to add. Adding `TRACE_EVENT()` macros are quite easy and they are popping up all over the kernel. The 2.6.34-rc3 kernel currently has over 300 `TRACE_EVENT()` macros defined; 341 as of this writing. 

The code to implement the trace events uses lots of cpp tricks to accomplish its task. But the complexity of the implementation simplified the usage of tracepoints. The rule of thumb in creating the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro was: make the use of the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro as simple as possible, even if that makes the implementation of it extremely complex. Sometimes, the easier something is to use, the more complexity there is to create it. Now, a developer does not need to know how the `TRACE_EVENT()` macro works, she or he only needs to know that the work has been done for them. Adding `TRACE_EVENT()`s are easy, and any developer can now take advantage of them. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development tools/Kernel tracing](/Kernel/Index#Development_tools-Kernel_tracing)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Tracing](/Kernel/Index#Tracing)  
[GuestArticles](/Archives/GuestIndex/)| [Rostedt, Steven](/Archives/GuestIndex/#Rostedt_Steven)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
