# 2.6.35 merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
May 19, 2010
It's that time again: a new kernel development cycle has started and the
merge window is currently open for new code.  As of this writing, some
1100 non-merge changes have been incorporated into the mainline kernel.
The most significant user-visible changes include:
The performance monitoring subsystem supports the Intel "precise event
     based sampling" (PEBS) mode, in which the hardware directly records
     event information into a dedicated memory region.  The perf subsystem
     also can now obtain performance 
     information from old Pentium4 CPUs.
The "perf kvm" tool, which allows the monitoring of virtualized guests
     from the host, has been merged.
The dynamic probe code has better support for a number of basic
     integer types.
The "fair sleepers," "sync wakeups," and "affine wakeup" scheduler
     feature flags have 
     been removed.  It seems that, at this point, the scheduler developers
     don't believe that things will work properly without those features,
     so they are always enabled.
The SuperH architecture now has hotplug CPU support.
New drivers:
Processors and boards
: HP iPAQ rx1950 devices, Acer N35
     	  systems, Samsung S3C2416-based systems, Marvell GuruPlug
     	  reference boards, Voipac PXA270 single-board computers, Aeronix
     	  Zipit Z2 systems, Cavium Networks CNS3xxx processors, Cavium
     	  Networks CNS3420 MPCore boards,  taskit PortuxG20 and Stamp9G20
     	  boards, ARM SPEAr3XX- and 
     	  SPEAr6XX-based systems, Versatile Express CA9x4 processors, and ARM
     	  Ltd Versatile Express boards.
Miscellaneous
: DaVinci DM365-based realtime clock devices.
Changes visible to kernel developers include:
The "cpu_stop" (formerly
cpuhog
) mechanism has been
     merged.  A cpu_stop allows kernel code to monopolize one or more
     processors for brief periods.
Augmented rbtrees
are now in the
     mainline kernel.
The
INIT_RCU_HEAD()
macro is going away; it was never really
     needed for RCU functionality, and RCU debugging is moving to the
object debugging
infrastructure.
As can be seen above, the 2.6.35 merge window has gotten off to a bit of a
slow start.  By the old schedule, the window would remain open through the
end of the month; there has been speculation that Linus will close it
rather sooner than that this time around, though, to inconvenience
maintainers who wait too long to get their pull requests in.  One way or
another, there should certainly be more changes to report on next week.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Releases/2.6.35
to post comments