# 2.6.35 Video4Linux2 enhancements [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
May 25, 2010 

The 2.6.35 development cycle has been a busy one for the Video4Linux2 subsystem, with quite a bit of new infrastructure and some new drivers merged. This article will provide an overview of some of the new capabilities in V4L2. 

#### Memory-to-memory devices

Video hardware often includes subsystems which are capable of processing video streams in various ways. The VIA chipset that your editor has recently been working with, for example, has a "high quality video" (HQV) engine which can be used to change video formats, rotate frames, convert between color spaces, perform deinterlacing, and more. It is not uncommon for video drivers to make use of an engine like this to make a wider range of formats and options available to applications. When used in this mode, the processing engine is hidden from user space; it looks like a part of the video input or output device. 

But there can be value in making the video processing engine available as a device in its own right; applications will then be able to use it to accelerate operations on video data. The kernel has made other data-transformation engines available through various interfaces, the "dmaengine" API in particular. Simple DMA engines can move data around and possibly perform a transformation - exclusive-or with a value, for example. More complex engines can perform cryptographic transformations, and, indeed, are used for this purpose within the kernel's cryptographic code. 

The dmaengine API has not been used for video processing engines, though. Your editor has not been told the reasons for that decision, but there are a couple of obvious guesses, starting with the fact that video engines might, in fact, not do DMA. For example, the VIA HQV engine requires that the relevant data be present in framebuffer memory. Perhaps more telling, though, is the complexity of the transformations which might be performed. Video data streams have an appalling number of formats and parameters; it takes a fairly complex API to allow applications to describe the sort of stream they want to deal with. Such an API could certainly be created for a new video processing facility, but that API already exists in the form of the V4L2 specification. It makes far more sense to reuse that API than to try to create it anew. Reusing the API happens naturally if the video processing engine looks like a V4L2 device in its own right. 

So the new memory-to-memory (m2m) infrastructure is designed to enable the creation of V4L2 devices which move video frames from one memory buffer to another, performing some sort of transformation on the way. Frames are fed to the device as if it were an ordinary video output device, with all of the appropriate configuration done to describe the format of those frames. The video input side is, instead, configured with the format the application would like to have. The driver takes frames written to the device by applications, runs them through the processing engine, then makes them available for reading as if it were an ordinary video capture device. 

The m2m API will only be discussed in the most superficial way here; see `<media/v4l2-mem2mem.h>` for more details. Drivers start by defining a set of callbacks: 
    
    
        struct v4l2_m2m_ops {
    	void (*device_run)(void *priv);
    	int (*job_ready)(void *priv);
    	void (*job_abort)(void *priv);
        };
    

The `device_run()` callback will be called when there is work for the engine to do; `job_abort()`, instead, is called when the engine must be stopped as quickly as possible. The optional `job_ready()` function should return a nonzero if the driver could currently start a job without sleeping. 

The callbacks are registered with: 
    
    
        struct v4l2_m2m_dev *v4l2_m2m_init(struct v4l2_m2m_ops *m2m_ops);
    

When the device is opened, the driver should make a call to: 
    
    
        struct v4l2_m2m_ctx *v4l2_m2m_ctx_init(void *priv, 
                            struct v4l2_m2m_dev *m2m_dev,
    			void (*vq_init)(void *priv, struct videobuf_queue *,
    					enum v4l2_buf_type));
    

The `priv` value will be passed through to the above-described callbacks. Two calls to `vq_init()` will be made, one each for the input and output buffer queues; `vq_init()` should, in turn, make a call to the appropriate [videobuf](http://lwn.net/Articles/363349/) initialization function. 

There is a whole set of helper functions meant to be used to implement many of the V4L2 operations: `v4l2_m2m_reqbufs()`, `v4l2_m2m_qbuf()`, `v4l2_m2m_streamon()`, `v4l2_m2m_mmap()`, etc. They handle most of the heavy lifting of implementing a memory-to-memory driver, calling the `device_run()` callback when there is work to do and buffers are available. As the driver fills buffers with processed frames and passes them back to the videobuf system, they will, in turn, be handed back to the application. 

Once again, most of the details have been glossed over, but that's the core of what this API does. As of this writing, there are no drivers for real hardware using this API in the mainline, though some have been posted for review. A sample user can be seen in `drivers/media/video/mem2mem_testdev.c`. 

#### Events

The V4L2 API is dominated by the description of video streams and the actual movement of frames. There are other things of interest, though, which may happen in an asynchronous manner. To support the passing of asynchronous events to user space, a new set of events operations has been added. The initial use of this code is to allow applications to request notification for vertical sync events or the loss of the video stream. 

At the user-space API level, there are a few additions to the seemingly endless list of V4L2 `ioctl()` commands: `VIDIOC_SUBSCRIBE_EVENT`, `VIDIOC_UNSUBSCRIBE_EVENT`, and `VIDIOC_DQEVENT`. Once an application has subscribed to one or more events, it can learn about them in the usual ways, including signals and `poll()`; a `VIDIOC_DQEVENT` call allows the application to see what actually happened. 

Within the kernel, the event API starts with a new mechanism for the management of file handles associated with a device. Each new open file must be set up with: 
    
    
        #include <media/v4l2-fh.h>
    
        int v4l2_fh_init(struct v4l2_fh *fh, struct video_device *vdev);
        void v4l2_fh_add(struct v4l2_fh *fh);
    

That sets up the connections which allow V4L2 drivers to associate things (like events) with specific open files. 

A driver which supports events should start with a call to: 
    
    
        #include <media/v4l2-event.h>
    
        int v4l2_event_alloc(struct v4l2_fh *fh, unsigned int n);
    

This call will try to ensure that storage is available for at least `n` events on this file handle. Actual events are signaled with: 
    
    
        struct v4l2_event {
    	__u32				type;
    	union {
    		struct v4l2_event_vsync vsync;
    		__u8			data[64];
    	} u;
    	/* ... */
        };
    
        void v4l2_event_queue(struct video_device *vdev, 
                              const struct v4l2_event *ev);
    

In addition, there is the usual set of helper functions (`v4l2_event_dequeue()`, `v4l2_event_subscribe()`, ...) meant to be called from the driver's V4L2 callbacks. 

Currently, events are only supported by the IVTV driver, so that is the place to look for a usage example. 

#### The infrared core

Back in December, LWN [looked at the state of infrared receiver drivers](http://lwn.net/Articles/364515/) in the kernel - or, in the case of the long out-of-tree LIRC subsystem, out of the kernel. That discussion has long since died down, but the hacking did not stop. The result is that, with 2.6.35, the V4L2 subsystem has a new framework for IR receivers. There is support for a number of controllers at this point. The IR core also includes an interface where drivers (or user space) can feed simple "mark" or "space" timing information which is then decoded in software; that should make it possible to hook a number of user-space LIRC drivers into the system. 

Documentation on the new IR core is sparse; basic kernel API information can be found in `include/media/ir-core.h` and `ir-common.h`. 

#### In conclusion

It has been a busy merge window for one of the most active subsystems in the kernel. Over the last few years, the V4L2 subsystem has built up an impressive amount of infrastructure and has reached the point where it supports almost all of the available hardware. That said, there is still quite a bit of work in progress; traffic on the mailing list is concerned with multi-plane video buffer support, a new control framework, and more. So future merge windows are likely to be busy in this part of the tree as well.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Device drivers/Video4Linux2](/Kernel/Index#Device_drivers-Video4Linux2)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Video4Linux2](/Kernel/Index#Video4Linux2)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
