# Finding a patch's kernel version with git [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jake Edge**  
June 16, 2010 

Back in May, Jan Kara posted a VFS [patch](/Articles/392303/) that fixed a regression and he sent the patch to the stable tree folks as well. Linus Torvalds [noted](/Articles/392304/) that it had been introduced in the merge window, so it wasn't relevant for the stable tree. That led to a discussion about how to figure out which kernel version includes a particular patch. While the conversation is a month old, the advice is pretty much timeless. 

Andrew Morton's [method](/Articles/392305/) is rather sub-optimal: ""I just keep lots of kernel trees around and poke about with `patch \--dry-run'. PITA."" Christoph Hellwig and James Bottomley both suggested `git-describe <revid>`, which will show the tag of the version a patch was applied to, or was pulled into if you use the `--contains` flag. As one might guess, though, Torvalds had some more [elaborate suggestions](/Articles/392306/). One can use `git name-rev` in much the same way as `git-describe --contains`, but a more ""obscure"" way to get the same kind of information is: 
    
    
        git log --tags --source --author=viro --oneline fs/namei.c
    

which shows commits by Al Viro of `fs/namei.c` along with the tagged version each commit was included into. On a recent kernel tree, the start of that output looks like: 
    
    
        d83c49f v2.6.34 Fix the regression created by "set S_DEAD on unlink()..." commit
        3e297b6 v2.6.34-rc3 Restore LOOKUP_DIRECTORY hint handling in final lookup on op
        781b167 v2.6.34-rc2 Fix a dumb typo - use of & instead of &&
        1f36f77 v2.6.34-rc2 Switch !O_CREAT case to use of do_last()
    

While the specific example Torvalds gave might not be widely applicable, the basic idea behind it is. Using `git-blame` to track down the commit where a particular change was made is often useful, but the dates in the log can be misleading with regards to which kernel(s) the change ended up in. Using some combination of `describe` and `log` will make figuring those kinds of things out much easier.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development tools/Git](/Kernel/Index#Development_tools-Git)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Git](/Kernel/Index#Git)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
