# 2.6.36 merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 4, 2010 

The 2.6.36 merge window got off to a rather slow start; Linus, perhaps, has been [spending too much time with his coffee maker](http://torvalds-family.blogspot.com/) and not enough at the keyboard. Things got rolling, though, on the afternoon of August 4; as of this writing, about 2600 patches have been merged into the mainline. Here is a summary of what has been seen so far. 

User-visible changes include: 

  * The 9p filesystem has gained support for extended attributes and a new, Linux-specific variant of the 9p2000 protocol called 9p2000.L. 

  * The CIFS filesystem can now make use of [FS-Cache](http://lwn.net/Articles/312708/) to keep local copies of files for performance. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

  * The TOMOYO Linux security module has a new "interactive enforcing mode," allowing an administrator to permit policy violations at run time. It is intended to help when installing application updates (which require policy changes) on running production systems. 

  * At long last, the AppArmor security module has been merged. 

  * Rafael Wysocki's [wakeup_count mechanism](http://lwn.net/Articles/393314/) has been merged. This feature is intended to make it possible to suspend the system without having to worry about races with wakeup events; it thus hopes to solve part of the problem addressed by suspend blockers. 

  * Support for the LIRC infrared controller API has been merged, along with a long list of LIRC drivers. LIRC is one of the larger pieces of out-of-tree code which is still shipped by many distributors, so this merge should help bring distributor kernels that much closer to the mainline. 

  * New drivers: 

    * **Boards and systems** : Bluewater Systems Snapper 9260/9G20 modules, HP t5325 thin client systems, NXP Semiconductor LPC32xx-based systems, and Eukrea CPUIMX51 and CPUIMX35 modules. 

    * **Input** : Atmel QT602240 I2C touchscreens, Analog Devices ADXL34x three-axis digital accelerometers, and Cypress cy8ctmg110 touchscreens. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : ARM Ltd. character LCD displays, HTC "Dream" (G1 handset) GPIO lines, and Intel "intelligent power sharing" controllers. 

    * **Networking** : Freescale Flexcan CAN controllers, ESD USB/2 CAN/USB interfaces, Chelsio T4-based gigabit and 10Gb Ethernet adapters with PCI-E SR-IOV virtual functions, and CAIF protocol drivers on slave SPI interfaces 

    * **Video4Linux** : i.MX27/i.MX25 camera sensor interfaces, SunPlus SPCA1528-based USB cameras, SQ Technologies SQ930X-based USB cameras, Windows Media Center Edition eHome infrared transceivers, and Freescale VIU video engines. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The ARM architecture has lost support for the "discontigmem" memory model; it is expected that everybody is using sparsemem at this point. ARM has also switched from the old bootmem allocator to memblock (formerly LMB) and added support for the -fstack-protector GCC feature. 

  * The DMAPI hooks have been dropped from the XFS filesystem, indicating that the XFS developers do not ever expect to get hierarchical storage management at this level merged. 

  * The PM_QOS API has changed again; quality-of-service requests are now added with: 
        
        void pm_qos_add_request(struct pm_qos_request_list *request,
        			    int pm_qos_class, s32 value);
        

The biggest change is that the `request` structure must now be allocated by the caller; this shifts a bit of work but, importantly, allows this function to be called in atomic context. 




The merge window can be expected to remain open until around August 15, unless Linus decides to surprise developers by making it shorter.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/2.6.36](/Kernel/Index#Releases-2.6.36)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
