# The 2003 Kernel Developers Summit [LWN.net]

[Reporting by LWN.net Executive Editor Jonathan Corbet]

The 2003 Kernel Developers summit was held July 21 and 22 in Ottawa, immediately before the Ottawa Linux Symposium. Nearly 70 developers attended the invitation-only event and discussed numerous topics relevant to the ongoing development of the Linux kernel. LWN editor Jonathan Corbet was there, and has documented most of the sessions below. 

### Monday sessions

  * [The requirements panel](/Articles/40613/); a six-member panel representing large Linux vendors and users discussed their wishes for future Linux kernel developments. 

  * [High availability](/Articles/40620/); a session led by Lars Marowsky-Brée on what Linux needs to better support high-availability applications. 

  * [Workload management](/Articles/40625/), led by Ken Rosendal. 

  * [NUMA management](/Articles/40626/), led by Andi Kleen. 

  * [Error and event logging](/Articles/40629/), a session led by Suparna Bhattacharya. 

  * [I/O clustering](/Articles/40635/); Gerrit Huizenga ran a session on improving file write performance. 

  * [ACPI and power management](/Articles/40636/), a discussion of power issues, hardware management, and sysfs led by Andrew Grover and Pat Mochel. 

  * Greg Kroah-Hartman discussed his udev utility as a way of replacing devfs. LWN covered udev [back in April](/Articles/28897/), and it has changed little since. About the only news was the announcement that a persistent device naming and permissions scheme is in the works and will be added soon. 

  * [Five-minute brainstorming](/Articles/40638/); a free-form session where kernel developers could quickly present ideas or concerns. This session ended with Linus talking a bit about the 2.6.0 release and the eventual 2.7 fork. 


[![\[Linus and
Andrew\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/ns/linus+andrew-sm.jpg)](/Articles/40902/)

## Tuesday sessions

Tuesday's sessions included: 

  * [The Processor Architects' Panel](/Articles/40831/) brought together processor designers from three manufacturers to talk about where their product lines are going and implications for the Linux kernel. 

  * [Transparent superpages and page clustering](/Articles/40840/), discussions led by Dave Mosberger and William Irwin. 

  * [Reverse-mapping VM performance](/Articles/40796/), a session led by Rik van Riel. 

  * Martin Bligh ran [a session on various VM topics](/Articles/40847/). 

  * [Asynchronous I/O](/Articles/40810/), run by Suparna Bhattacharya. 

  * James Bottomley celebrated his birthday with [this session on the SCSI subsystem](/Articles/40850/). 

  * [Multipath I/O](/Articles/40852/); this session run by Mike Anderson and Lars Marowsky-Brée looked mostly at problems with current Linux multipath implementations and the desired features for a new implementation. 

  * The [closing session](/Articles/40853/) of the summit was a discussion of what went well (or not) with the 2.5 development series, along with a look forward to how 2.6 will work. 




The [traditional kernel summit group photo](/Articles/40830/) is also available.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Kernel Summit](/Kernel/Index#Kernel_Summit)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Kernel Summit/2003](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Kernel_Summit-2003)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
