# Kconfiglib [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
February 2, 2011 

The kernel configuration system is a complex bit of code in its own right; many people who have no trouble hacking on kernel code find reasons to avoid going into the configuration subsystem. There is value in being able to work with the complicated data structure that is a kernel configuration, though. Ulf Magnusson has recently posted a library, [Kconfiglib](/Articles/426006/), which, he hopes, will make that easier. 

Kconfiglib is a Python library which is able to load, analyze, and output kernel configurations; care has been taken to ensure that any configuration it creates is identical to what comes out of the existing kernel configuration system. With Kconfiglib, it becomes straightforward to write simple tools like "allnoconfig"; it also is possible to ask questions about a given configuration. One possible tool, for example, would answer the "why can't I select `CONFIG_FOO`" question - a useful feature indeed. 

There are currently no Python dependencies in the kernel build system; trying to add one could well run into opposition. But Kconfiglib could find a role in the creation of ancillary tools which are not required to configure and build a kernel as it's always been done. For the curious, there's [a set of examples](http://dl.dropbox.com/u/10406197/kconfiglib.html) available.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Build system/Kernel configuration](/Kernel/Index#Build_system-Kernel_configuration)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
