# Capabilities for loading network modules [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jake Edge**  
March 2, 2011 

Linux capabilities are still a work in progress. They have been in the kernel for a _long_ time—since the 2.1 days in 1998—but for various reasons, it has taken more than a decade for distributions to really start using the feature. While capabilities ostensibly provide a way to give limited privileges to processes, rather than the all-or-none setuid model, the feature has been beset with incompleteness, limitations, complexity concerns, and other problems. Now that Fedora, Openwall, and other distributions are working on actually _using_ capabilities to reduce the privileges extended to system binaries we are seeing some of those problems shake out. 

A [patch](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux-2.6.git;a=commit;h=a8f80e8ff94ecba629542d9b4b5f5a8ee3eb565c) that was merged for 2.6.32 is one such example. The idea behind it was that the `CAP_NET_ADMIN` capability should be enough to allow loading network modules, rather than requiring `CAP_SYS_MODULE`. The `CAP_SYS_MODULE` capability allows loading modules from anywhere, rather than restricting the module search path to `/lib/modules/...`. So, by switching to use `CAP_NET_ADMIN`, network utilities, like `ifconfig`, could be restricted to only load system modules, rather than arbitrary code. 

There is one problem with that scheme, though, as Vasiliy Kulikov [pointed out](/Articles/430482/), because it allows processes with `CAP_NET_ADMIN` to load any module from `/lib/modules`, not just those that are networking related. Or, as he puts it: 
    
    
        root@albatros:~# grep Cap /proc/$$/status
        CapInh: 0000000000000000
        CapPrm: fffffffc00001000
        CapEff: fffffffc00001000
        CapBnd: fffffffc00001000
        root@albatros:~# lsmod | grep xfs
        root@albatros:~# ifconfig xfs
        xfs: error fetching interface information: Device not found
        root@albatros:~# lsmod | grep xfs
        xfs                   767011  0 
        exportfs                4226  2 xfs,nfsd
    

That example deserves a bit of explanation. The first command establishes that the capabilities of the shell are just `CAP_NET_ADMIN` (capability number 12 of the 34 currently defined capabilities). Kulikov then goes on to show that the `xfs` module is not loaded _until_ he loads it via `ifconfig`. That is clearly not the expected behavior. In fact it is now [CVE-2011-1019](http://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2011-1019) (which is just reserved at the time of this writing). For those that want to try this out at home, Kulikov gives the proper incantation in his [v2 patch](/Articles/430491/): 
    
    
        # capsh --drop=$(seq -s, 0 11),$(seq -s, 13 34) --
    

Note that on not-quite-bleeding-edge kernels (e.g. Fedora 14's kernel), the 34 should be changed to 33 to account for the lack of a `CAP_SYSLOG`, which was just recently added. Running that command will give you a shell with just `CAP_NET_ADMIN`. 

Kulikov's first [patch proposal](/Articles/430495/) simply changed the `request_module()` call in the core networking `dev_load()` function to only load modules that start with "netdev-", with udev expected to set up the appropriate aliases. There are three modules that already have aliases (`ip_gre.c`, `ipip.c`, and `sit.c`) in the code, so the patch changes those to prefix "netdev-". But David Miller was not happy with changing those names, as it will break existing code. 

There was also a bit of a digression regarding attackers recompiling modules with a "netdev-" alias, but unless that attacker can install the code in `/lib/modules`, it isn't a real problem. In this case, the threat model is a subverted binary that has `CAP_NET_ADMIN`, which is not a capability that would allow it to write to `/lib/modules`. But Miller's complaint is more substantial, as anything that used to do "`ifconfig sit0`", for example, will no longer work. 

After some discussion of various ways to handle that problem, Arnd Bergmann [noted](/Articles/430707/) that the backward compatibility problem is only for systems that are not splitting up capabilities (i.e. they just use root or setuid with the full capability set). For those, the `CAP_SYS_MODULE` capability can be required, while the programs that only have `CAP_NET_ADMIN` will be new, and thus can use the new "netdev-" names. The code will look something like: 
    
    
        no_module = !dev;
        if (no_module && capable(CAP_NET_ADMIN))
    	    no_module = request_module("netdev-%s", name);
        if (no_module && capable(CAP_SYS_MODULE)) {
    	    if (!request_module("%s", name))
    		    pr_err("Loading kernel module for a network device "
        "with CAP_SYS_MODULE (deprecated).  Use CAP_NET_ADMIN and alias netdev-%s "
        "instead\n", name);
    

That solution seemed to be acceptable to Miller and others, so we may well see it in the mainline soon. One thing to note, though, is that capabilities are part of the kernel ABI, so changes to their behavior will be difficult to sell, in general. This change is fixing a security problem—and is hopefully not a behavior that any user-space application is relying on—so it is likely to find a reasonably smooth path into the kernel. Other changes that come up as more systems start to actually _use_ the various capability bits may be more difficult to do, though we have already seen some [problems](/Articles/421671/) with the current definitions of various capabilities. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Capabilities](/Kernel/Index#Capabilities)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Security technologies](/Kernel/Index#Security-Security_technologies)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel/Linux/POSIX capabilities](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel-LinuxPOSIX_capabilities)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
