# Converting strings to integers [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 23, 2011 

Kernel developers might rightly complain about being confused over which functions should be used to convert strings to integer types. Old functions like `simple_strtoul()` will silently ignore junk at the end of an integer value, so "`100xx`" successfully converts to an unsigned integer type. Alternatives like `strict_strtoul()` have been encouraged instead, but they have problems too, including the lack of overflow checks. So what's a kernel hacker to do? 

As of 2.6.39, there is a new set of string-to-integer converters which is expected to be used in preference to all others. 

  * Unsigned conversions can be done with any of `kstrtoull()`, `kstrtoul()`, `kstrtouint()`, `kstrtou64()`, `kstrtou32()`, `kstrtou16()`, or `kstrtou8()`. 

  * Conversions to signed integers can be done with `kstrtoll()`, `kstrtol()`, `kstrtoint()`, `kstrtos64()`, `kstrtos32()`, `kstrtos16()`, or `kstrtos8()`. 




All of these functions are marked `__must_check`, so callers are expected to check to ensure that the conversion happened successfully. The older functions are marked deprecated, and will eventually be removed. These new `kstrto*()` functions are now the Official Best Way To Convert Strings, so developers need wonder no longer.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [String processing](/Kernel/Index#String_processing)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
