# Ftrace, perf, and the tracing ABI [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
May 11, 2011
Arjan van de Ven recently
reported
that a
2.6.39 change in how tracepoint data is reported by the kernel broke
powertop; he requested that the change be partially reverted.  The
resulting discussion covered the familiar problem of how tracepoints mix
with the kernel ABI.  But it also revealed some serious disagreements on
how tracing data should be provided by the kernel and, perhaps, the
direction that this interface will take in the future.
Each tracepoint defined in the kernel includes a number of fields
containing values relevant to the specific event being documented.  For
example, the
sched_switch
tracepoint, which fires when the
scheduler is switching between processes, includes the IDs of both
processes, their priorities, and so on.  Every tracepoint also has a few
"common" fields, including the process ID, its flags, and the value of the
preempt_count
variable; if trace data is read in binary form,
those values will appear at the beginning of the structure read from the
kernel.
Prior to the 2.6.32 development cycle, those common fields also included
the thread group ID; that value was removed in September, 2009.  A look at
the
powertop
source
shows that the program expects that field to still be there
(though it does not use it); its
internally-defined structure for trace data includes a
tgid
field.  So this change should have broken powertop, and it would have
except for one other change: on the very same day, Steve Rostedt added the
lock_depth
common field to report whether the current process held
the big kernel lock (BKL).  The addition of this field was never meant to
be permanent: its whole purpose, after all, was to help with the removal of
the BKL from the kernel entirely.
For 2.6.39, the
lock_depth
common field was removed, and powertop
broke.  Arjan subsequently complained; he also supplied a patch which put a
zero-filled padding field where
lock_depth
used to be.  Steve
opposed the patch
, on the grounds that, had
powertop used the tracing ABI properly, it would not have broken.  The
kernel exports information about each tracepoint; for the above-mentioned
sched_switch
, that information can be examined from the command
line:
# cat /sys/kernel/debug/tracing/events/sched/sched_switch/format
    name: sched_switch
    ID: 51
    format:
	field:unsigned short common_type; offset:0; size:2;	signed:0;
	field:unsigned char common_flags; offset:2; size:1; signed:0;
	field:unsigned char common_preempt_count; offset:3; size:1; signed:0;
	field:int common_pid; offset:4; size:4; signed:1;

	field:char prev_comm[16]; offset:8; size:16; signed:1;
	field:pid_t prev_pid; offset:24; size:4; signed:1;
	field:int prev_prio; offset:28; size:4; signed:1;
	field:long prev_state; offset:32; size:8; signed:1;
	field:char next_comm[16]; offset:40; size:16; signed:1;
	field:pid_t next_pid; offset:56; size:4; signed:1;
	field:int next_prio; offset:60; size:4; signed:1;
A properly-written program, Steve says, should read this file and use the
offset values found there to obtain the data it is interested in.  Linus
seemed to agree
that it would have been nice
if things worked out that way, but that's not what happened.  Instead, at
least one program became dependent on the binary format of the trace data
exported from the kernel.  That is enough to make that format part of the
kernel ABI; breaking that program counts as a regression.  So Arjan's patch
was merged.
Steve did not like this outcome; it went against all the effort which had
gone into creating a means by which tracepoints could change without
breaking applications.  The alternative, he
said
, was to bury the kernel in compatibility
cruft:
The reason tracepoints have currently been stable is that kernel
	 design changes do not happen often. But they do happen, and I
	 foresee that in the future, the kernel will have a large number of
	 "legacy tracepoints", and we will be stuck maintaining them
	 forever.
What happens if someone designs a tool that analyzes the XFS
	 filesystem's 200+ tracepoints? Will all those tracepoints now
	 become ABI?
The notion that XFS tracepoints could become part of the ABI was
dismissed
as "
crazy talk
" by Dave
Chinner, but there is nothing inherently different about those
tracepoints.  They could, indeed, end up as part of the kernel ABI.
Steve was also concerned about the size of events; removal of
lock_depth
, beyond eliminating a (now) meaningless bit of data,
also served to make each event four bytes smaller.
There is always pressure to reduce the overhead of
tracing, and reducing the bandwidth of the data copied to user space is
part of that; adding the pad field goes against that goal.  David Sharp (of
Google)
chimed in
to note that data size
matters a lot to them:
The size of events is a *huge* issue for us. Please look at the
	patches we have been sending out for tracing: A lot of them are
	about reducing the size of events. Most of the patches we carry
	internally are about reducing the size of events. Memory is the
	most scarce resource on our systems, so we *cannot* afford to use
	large trace buffers.
Steve had hoped to remove some of the other common fields as well (a change
that Google has already made internally); that idea has gone by the wayside
for now.  Tracepoints, it seems, are ABI, even when the information they
report no longer makes sense in the kernel.
The remainder of this discussion became a sort of bunfight between Steve
and Ingo Molnar as they sought to place the blame for this problem and to
determine how things will go in the future.  Ingo
attacked
Steve for resisting the idea of
unchanging tracepoints,
accused
him of
maintaining ftrace as a fork of perf in the kernel (despite the fact that
ftrace was there first), and
said
that perf
needed to take over:
perf is basically the ftrace UI and APIs done better, cleaner and
	more robustly. Look at all the tooling that sprang up around that
	ABI, almost overnight.  ftrace evolved through many iterations in
	the past and perf was simply the next logical step.
He also threatened to stop pulling tracing changes from Steve.
Steve, in
return, blamed perf for bolting itself onto the ftrace infrastructure, then
exporting ftrace's binary structures directly to user space.  He blamed Ingo for
blocking changes intended to improve the situation (for example, the
creation of a separate directory for stable tracepoints agreed to at the
2010 Kernel Summit
) and complained
that Ingo was ignoring his attempts to create tracing infrastructure which
works for everybody.  He also worried, again, that set-in-stone tracepoint
formats would impede progress in the kernel.
Despite all of this, Steve
is willing
to
work toward the unification of ftrace and perf, as long as it doesn't mean
leaving ftrace behind:
Now that perf has entered the tracing field, I would be happy to
	bring the two together. But we disagree on how to do that. I will
	not drop ftrace totally just to work on perf. There's too many
	users of ftrace that want enhancements, and I will still support
	that. The reason being is that I honestly do not believe that perf
	can do what these users want anytime in the near future (if at
	all). I will not abandon a successful project just because you feel
	that it is a fork.
So it seems that, while there are clearly disagreements and tension between
the developers in this area, there should also be room for a solution that
works for everybody.  Development emphasis will clearly continue to move
toward perf, but, despite Ingo's desire to the contrary, ftrace will likely
continue to be improved.  We may see efforts to push applications toward
libraries that can shield them from tracepoint changes, but, for now, 
every tracepoint added to the kernel will probably have to
be considered to be part of its ABI; given that, developers should probably
be reviewing new tracepoints more closely than they have been.  And, with
luck, instrumentation in Linux - which has improved considerably in the
last few years - will continue to get better.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Development model/User-space ABI
Kernel
Development tools/Kernel tracing
Kernel
Ftrace
Kernel
Performance monitoring
Kernel
Tracing/ABI issues
to post comments