# 3.0 merge window part 2 [LWN.net]

> **Ready to give LWN a try?**
> 
> With a subscription to LWN, you can stay current with what is happening in the Linux and free-software community and take advantage of subscriber-only site features. We are pleased to offer you **[a free trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-trial/claim)** , no credit card required, so that you can see for yourself. Please, join us! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 1, 2011 

In the end, 7,333 non-merge changesets were pulled into the mainline kernel before Linus closed the merge window and decreed that the next release would be called "3.0". There have not been vast numbers of exciting new features added since [last week's summary](/Articles/444288/) was written, but there are a few. The most significant user-visible changes include: 

  * The [namespace file descriptors patch](/Articles/407495/), which includes the `setns()` system call, has been merged. This feature makes it easier to manage containers running in different namespaces. 

  * The XFS filesystem now has online discard support. 

  * The [Cleancache](/Articles/386090/) functionality has been merged. Cleancache allows for intermediate storage of pages which have been pushed out of the page cache but which might still be useful in the future. Cleancache is initially supported by ext3, ext4, and ocfs2. 

  * A new netlink-based infrastructure allows the management of RDMA clients. 

  * It is now possible to move all threads in a group into a control group at once using the `cgroup.procs` control file. 

  * The Blackfin architecture has gained perf events support. 

  * The btrfs filesystem has gained support for a administrator-initiated "scrub" operation that can read through a filesystem's blocks and verify checksums. When possible, bad copies of data will be replaced by good copies from another storage device. Also supported by btrfs is an `auto_defrag` mount option causing the filesystem to notice random writes to files and schedule them for defragmentation. 

  * The `no-hlt` boot parameter has been deprecated; no machines have needed it in this millennium. Should there be any machines with non-working HLT instructions running current kernels, they can be booted with `idle=poll`. 

  * Support for the pNFS protocol backed by object storage devices has been added. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **Systems and processors** : TILE-Gx 64-bit processors and Blackfin SPORT SPI busses. 

    * **Input** : Qualcomm PMIC8XXX keypads. 

    * **Media** : Fintek consumer infrared transceivers, and Fujitsu M-5MOLS 8MP sensors. 

    * **Network** : GPIO-controlled RF-kill switches. 

    * **USB** : VUB300 USB to SDIO/SD/MMC host controllers. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : ST-Ericsson DB5500 power reset control management units, AMD Family 15h processor power monitors, SMSC EMC6W201 hardware monitors, Marvell 88PM860x real-time clocks, HTC ASIC3 LED controllers, Qualcomm PM8921 PMIC chips, Micro Crystal RV3029-C2 RTC chips, VIA/WonderMedia 85xx SoC RTC chips, ST M41T93 SPI RTC chips, EM Microelectronic EM3027 RTC chips, Maxim/Dallas DS2780 stand-alone fuel gauge ICs, Maxim MAX8903 battery chargers, and TI TPS65910 and TPS65911 power management chips. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * There is a new core support module for GPIO controllers based on memory-mapped I/O. 

  * There is a new `atomic_or()` operation to perform a logical OR operation on an `atomic_t` value. 




With the -rc1 release, Linus tagged the kernel "3.0.0" (with a new name of "Sneaky Weasel"). His stated intent is to drop the last digit during the stabilization period so that the final kernel would be just "3.0", but that depends on getting various user-space scripts fixed. Either way, the stable updates that most people will actually run will start with 3.0.1. 

Linus is clearly hoping for a relatively smooth development cycle this time around; he has hinted that he may be fussier than usual about the fixes that he'll pull from now on. 3.0, it seems, is supposed to be boring, just to drive home the point that the version number change does not really mean much. The final release, boring or not, can be expected sometime in the first half of July.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.0](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.0)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
