# Object-oriented design patterns in the kernel, part 2 [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

June 7, 2011

This article was contributed by Neil Brown

In the [first part](/Articles/444910/) of this analysis we looked at how the polymorphic side of object-oriented programming was implemented in the Linux kernel using regular C constructs. In particular we examined method dispatch, looked at the different forms that vtables could take, and the circumstances where separate vtables were eschewed in preference for storing function pointers directly in objects. In this conclusion we will explore a second important aspect of object-oriented programming - inheritance, and in particular data inheritance. 

### Data inheritance

Inheritance is a core concept of object-oriented programming, though it comes in many forms, whether prototype inheritance, mixin inheritance, subtype inheritance, interface inheritance etc., some of which overlap. The form that is of interest when exploring the Linux kernel is most like subtype inheritance, where a concrete or "final" type inherits some data fields from a "virtual" parent type. We will call this "data inheritance" to emphasize the fact that it is the data rather than the behavior that is being inherited. 

Put another way, a number of different implementations of a particular interface share, and separately extend, a common data structure. They can be said to inherit from that data structure. There are three different approaches to this sharing and extending that can be found in the Linux kernel, and all can be seen by exploring the `struct inode` structure and its history, though they are widely used elsewhere. 

#### Extension through unions

The first approach, which is probably the most obvious but also the least flexible, is to declare a union as one element of the common structure and, for each implementation, to declare an entry in that union with extra fields that the particular implementation needs. This approach was [introduced](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/history/history.git;a=commitdiff;h=eb79918f272fe119902db3028e0fbdc752f4942d#patch22) to `struct inode` in Linux-0.97.2 (August 1992) when 
    
    
           union {
                   struct minix_inode_info minix_i;
                   struct ext_inode_info ext_i;
                   struct msdos_inode_info msdos_i;
           } u;
    

was added to struct inode. Each of these structures remained empty until 0.97.5 when `i_data` was [moved](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/history/history.git;a=commitdiff;h=06d9f6ff137579551a2ee18661847915fe2bb812#patch32) from `struct inode` to `struct ext_inode_info`. Over the years several more "inode_info" fields were added for different filesystems, peaking at 28 different "inode_info" structures in 2.4.14.2 when [ext3 was added](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/tglx/history.git;a=blobdiff;f=include/linux/fs.h;h=935c6e9bfee8d331db28832c54e4bd99d6563e97;hp=33f3bb92af4011eb33a0b99c483803787c436d88;hb=a8a2069f432c5597bdf9c83ab3045b9ef32ab5e3;hpb=5db5272c0a5cd37e5a697e4750fbc4ce6317b7dc). 

This approach to data inheritance is simple and straightforward, but is also somewhat clumsy. There are two obvious problems. Firstly, every new filesystem implementation needs to add an extra field to the union "u". With 3 fields this may not seem like a problem, with 28 it was well past "ugly". Requiring every filesystem to update this one structure is a barrier to adding filesystems that is unnecessary. Secondly, every inode allocated will be the same size and will be large enough to store the data for any filesystem. So a filesystem that wants lots of space in its "inode_info" structure will impose that space cost on every other filesystem. 

The first of these issues is not an impenetrable barrier as we will see shortly. The second is a real problem and the general ugliness of the design encouraged change. Early in the 2.5 development series this change began; it was completed by 2.5.7 when there were no "inode_info" structures left in `union u` (though the union itself remained until 2.6.19). 

#### Embedded structures

The change that happened to inodes in early 2.5 was effectively an inversion. The change which [removed](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/tglx/history.git;a=blobdiff;f=include/linux/fs.h;h=6bda17aed79ac146466c42bd2355c246e4814d0e;hp=4e5de1286d87969509d812eb9c2f813ae61fd252;hb=463727d199b089c420e750d43f75ea9403a45e12;hpb=0713f0290054eb9769d588120712e3dccfb3ec34) `ext3_i` from `struct inode.u` also [added](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/tglx/history.git;a=blobdiff;f=include/linux/ext3_fs_i.h;h=104aea4e0c1958fe684c5fe02f33d02484adaa30;hp=3c8d398a81039044765ad86adaf09d2018867fd1;hb=463727d199b089c420e750d43f75ea9403a45e12;hpb=0713f0290054eb9769d588120712e3dccfb3ec34) a `struct inode`, called `vfs_inode`, to `struct ext3_inode_info`. So instead of the private structure being embedded in the common data structure, the common data structure is now embedded in the private one. This neatly avoids the two problems with unions; now each filesystem needs to only allocate memory to store its own structure without any need to know anything about what other filesystems might need. Of course nothing ever comes for free and this change brought with it other issues that needed to be solved, but the solutions were not costly. 

The first difficulty is the fact that when the common filesystem code \- the VFS layer - calls into a specific filesystem it passes a pointer to the common data structure, the `struct inode`. Using this pointer, the filesystem needs to find a pointer to its own private data structure. An obvious approach is to always place the `struct inode` at the top of the private inode structure and simply cast a pointer to one into a pointer to the other. While this can work, it lacks any semblance of type safety and makes it harder to arrange fields in the inode to get optimal performance - as some kernel developers are wont to do. 

The solution was to use the [`list_entry()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux-bk+v2.5.2/include/linux/list.h#L145) macro to perform the necessary pointer arithmetic, subtracting from the address of the `struct inode` its offset in the private data structure and then casting this appropriately. The macro for this was called `list_entry()` simply because the "list.h lists" implementation was the first to use this pattern of data structure embedding. The `list_entry()` macro did exactly what was needed and so it was used despite the strange name. This practice lasted until 2.5.28 when a new `container_of()` macro was [added](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/tglx/history.git;a=commitdiff;h=ec4f214232cfb99913308c20b9a3381e5fe1f04f#patch15) which implemented the same functionality as `list_entry()`, though with slightly more type safety and a more meaningful name. With `container_of()` it is a simple matter to map from an embedded data structure to the structure in which it is embedded. 

The second difficulty was that the filesystem had to be responsible for allocating the inode - it could no longer be allocated by common code as the common code did not have enough information to allocate the correct amount of space. This simply involved [adding](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/tglx/history.git;a=blobdiff;f=include/linux/fs.h;h=4e5de1286d87969509d812eb9c2f813ae61fd252;hp=a01f0c3b4d34df475a84532417c42d46eb0974ed;hb=468e6d17ff42e6f291a88c87681b2b5e34e9ab33;hpb=d694597ed5e1f6613d0933ee692333ab2542b603) `alloc_inode()` and `destroy_inode()` methods to the `super_operations` structure and calling them as appropriate. 

#### Void pointers

As noted earlier, the union pattern was not an impenetrable barrier to adding new filesystems independently. This is because the `union u` had one more field that was not an "inode_info" structure. A generic pointer field called `generic_ip` was [added](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/history/history.git;a=commitdiff;h=4aad5d636d7c5a543a82757d9be2e3f3e5c6724f#patch14) in Linux-1.0.5, but it was not used until 1.3.7. Any file system that does not own a structure in `struct inode` itself could define and allocate a separate structure and link it to the inode through `u.generic_ip`. This approach addressed both of the problems with unions as no changes are needed to shared declarations and each filesystem only uses the space that it needs. However it again introduced new problems of its own. 

Using `generic_ip`, each filesystem required two allocations for each inode instead of one and this could lead to more wastage depending on how the structure size was rounded up for allocation; it also required writing more error-handling code. Also there was memory used for the `generic_ip` pointer and often for a back pointer from the private structure to the common `struct inode`. Both of these are wasted space compared with the union approach or the embedding approach. 

Worse than this though, an extra memory dereference was needed to access the private structure from the common structure; such dereferences are best avoided. Filesystem code will often need to access both the common and the private structures. This either requires lots of extra memory dereferences, or it requires holding the address of the private structure in a register which increases register pressure. It was largely these concerns that stopped `struct inode` from ever migrating to broad use of the `generic_ip` pointer. It was certainly used, but not by the major, high-performance filesystems. 

Though this pattern has problems it is still in wide use. `struct super_block` has an `s_fs_info` pointer which serves the same purpose as `u.generic_ip` (which has since been renamed to `i_private` when the `u` union was finally removed - why it was not completely removed is left as an exercise for the reader). This is the only way to store filesystem-private data in a super_block. A simple search in the Linux include files shows quite a collection of fields which are void pointers named "private" or something similar. Many of these are examples of the pattern of extending a data type by using a pointer to a private extension, and most of these could be converted to using the embedded-structure pattern. 

### Beyond inodes

While inodes serve as an effective vehicle to introduce these three patterns they do not display the full scope of any of them so it is useful to look further afield and see what else we can learn. 

A survey of the use of unions elsewhere in the kernel shows that they are widely used though in very different circumstances than in `struct inode`. The particular aspect of inodes that is missing elsewhere is that a wide range of different modules (different filesystems) each wanted to extend an inode in different ways. In most places where unions are used there are a small fixed number of subtypes of the base type and there is little expectation of more being added. A simple example of this is [`struct nfs_fattr`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/nfs_xdr.h#L34) which stores file attribute information decoded out of an NFS reply. The details of these attributes are slightly different for NFSv2 and NFSv3 so there are effectively two subtypes of this structure with the difference encoded in a union. As NFSv4 uses the same information as NFSv3 this is very unlikely to ever be extended further. 

A very common pattern in other uses of unions in Linux is for encoding messages that are passed around, typically between the kernel and user-space. [`struct siginfo`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/asm-generic/siginfo.h#L40) is used to convey extra information with a signal delivery. Each signal type has a different type of ancillary information, so `struct siginfo` has a union to encode six different subtypes. [`union inputArgs`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/coda.h#L654) appears to be the largest current union with 22 different subtypes. It is used by the "coda" network file system to pass requests between the kernel module and a user-space daemon which handles the network communication. 

It is not clear whether these examples should be considered as the same pattern as the original `struct inode`. Do they really represent different subtypes of a base type, or is it just one type with internal variants? The [Eiffel object-oriented programming language](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eiffel_%28programming_language%29) does not support variant types at all except through subtype inheritance so there is clearly a school of thought that would want to treat all usages of union as a form of subtyping. Many other languages, such as C++, provide both inheritance and unions allowing the programmer to make a choice. So the answer is not clear. 

For our purposes it doesn't really matter what we call it as long as we know where to use each pattern. The examples in the kernel fairly clearly show that when all of the variants are understood by a single module, then a union is a very appropriate mechanism for variants structures, whether you want to refer to them as using data inheritance or not. When different subtypes are managed by different modules, or at least widely separate pieces of code, then one of the other mechanisms is preferred. The use of unions for this case has almost completely disappeared with only [`struct cycx_device`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/cyclomx.h#L43) remaining as an example of a deprecated pattern. 

#### Problems with void pointers

Void pointers are not quite so easy to classify. It would probably be fair to say that void pointers are the modern equivalent of "goto" statements. They can be very useful but they can also lead to very convoluted designs. A particular problem is that when you look at a void pointer, like looking at a goto, you don't really know what it is pointing at. A void pointer called `private` is even worse - it is like a "`goto destination`" command - almost meaningless without reading lots of context. 

Examining all the different uses that void pointers can be put to would be well beyond the scope of this article. Instead we will restrict our attention to just one new usage which relates to data inheritance and illustrates how the untamed nature of void pointers makes it hard to recognize their use in data inheritance. The example we will use to explain this usage is `[struct seq_file](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/seq_file.h#L16)` used by the seq_file library which makes it easy to synthesize simple text files like some of those in `/proc`. The "seq" part of seq_file simply indicates that the file contains a sequence of lines corresponding to a sequence of items of information in the kernel, so `/proc/mounts` is a `seq_file` which walks through the mount table reporting each mount on a single line. 

When [`seq_open()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/fs/seq_file.c#L30) is used to create a new seq_file it allocates a `struct seq_file` and assigns it to the `private_data` field of the `struct file` which is being opened. This is a straightforward example of void pointer based data inheritance where the `struct file` is the base type and the `struct seq_file` is a simple extension to that type. It is a structure that never exists by itself but is always the `private_data` for some file. `struct seq_file` itself has a `private` field which is a void pointer and it can be used by clients of seq_file to add extra state to the file. For example [`md_seq_open()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/drivers/md/md.c#L6496) allocates a `struct mdstat_info` structure and attaches it via this `private` field, using it to meet md's internal needs. Again, this is simple data inheritance following the described pattern. 

However the `private` field of `struct seq_file` is used by [`svc_pool_stats_open()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/net/sunrpc/svc_xprt.c#L1239) in a subtly but importantly different way. In this case the extra data needed is just a single pointer. So rather than allocating a local data structure to refer to from the `private` field, `svc_pool_stats_open` simply stores that pointer directly in the `private` field itself. This certainly seems like a sensible optimization - performing an allocation to store a single pointer would be a waste - but it highlights exactly the source of confusion that was suggested earlier: that when you look at a void pointer you don't really know what is it pointing at, or why. 

To make it a bit clearer what is happening here, it is helpful to imagine "`void *private`" as being like a union of every different possible pointer type. If the value that needs to be stored is a pointer, it can be stored in this union following the "unions for data inheritance" pattern. If the value is not a single pointer, then it gets stored in allocated space following the "void pointers for data inheritance" pattern. Thus when we see a void pointer being used it may not be obvious whether it is being used to **point to** an extension structure for data inheritance, or being used **as** an extension for data inheritance (or being used as something else altogether). 

To highlight this issue from a slightly different perspective it is instructive to examine [`struct v4l2_subdev`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/media/v4l2-subdev.h#L490) which represents a sub-device in a video4linux device, such as a sensor or camera controller within a webcam. According to the (rather helpful) [documentation](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/Documentation/video4linux/v4l2-framework.txt#L79) it is expected that this structure will normally be embedded in a larger structure which contains extra state. However this structure still has not just one but two void pointers, both with names suggesting that they are for private use by subtypes: 
    
    
    	/* pointer to private data */
    	void *dev_priv;
    	void *host_priv;
    

It is common that a v4l sub-device (a sensor, usually) will be realized by, for example, an I2C device (much as a block device which stores your filesystem might be realized by an ATA or SCSI device). To allow for this common occurrence, `struct v4l2_subdev` provides a void pointer (`dev_priv`), so that the driver itself doesn't need to define a more specific pointer in the larger structure which `struct v4l2_subdev` would be embedded in. `host_priv` is intended to point back to a "parent" device such as a controller which acquires video data from the sensor. Of the three drivers which use this field, [one](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/drivers/media/video/omap3isp/isp.c#L1751) appears to follow that intention while the [other](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/drivers/media/video/pxa_camera.c#L1276) [two](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/drivers/media/video/sh_mobile_ceu_camera.c#L904) use it to point to an allocated extension structure. So both of these pointers are intended to be used following the "unions for data inheritance" pattern, where a void pointer is playing the role of a union of many other pointer types, but they are not always used that way. 

It is not immediately clear that defining this void pointer in case it is useful is actually a valuable service to provide given that the device driver could easily enough define its own (type safe) pointer in its extension structure. What is clear is that an apparently "private" void pointer can be intended for various qualitatively different uses and, as we have seen in two different circumstances, they may not be used exactly as expected. 

In short, recognizing the "data inheritance through void pointers" pattern is not easy. A fairly deep examination of the code is needed to determine the exact purpose and usage of void pointers. 

#### A diversion into `struct page`

Before we leave unions and void pointers behind a look at [`struct page`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/mm_types.h#L34) may be interesting. This structure uses both of these patterns, though they are hidden somewhat due to historical baggage. This example is particularly instructive because it is one case where struct embedding simply is not an option. 

In Linux memory is divided into pages, and these pages are put to a variety of different uses. Some are in the "page cache" used to store the contents of files. Some are "anonymous pages" holding data used by applications. Some are used as "slabs" and divided into pieces to answer `kmalloc()` requests. Others are simply part of a multi-page allocation or maybe are on a free list waiting to be used. Each of these different use cases could be seen as a subtype of the general class of "page", and in most cases need some dedicated fields in `struct page`, such as a `struct address_space` pointer and `index` when used in the page cache, or `struct kmem_cache` and `freelist` pointers when used as a slab. 

Each page always has the same `struct page` describing it, so if the effective type of the page is to change - as it must as the demands for different uses of memory change over time - the type of the `struct page` must change within the lifetime of that structure. While many type systems are designed assuming that the type of an object is immutable, we find here that the kernel has a very real need for type mutability. Both unions and void pointers allow types to change and as noted, `struct page` uses both. 

At the first level of subtyping there are only a small number of different subtypes as listed above; these are all known to the core memory management code, so a union would be ideal here. Unfortunately `struct page` has three unions with fields for some subtypes spread over all three, thus hiding the real structure somewhat. 

When the primary subtype in use has the page being used in the page cache, the particular `address_space` that it belongs to may want to extend the data structure further. For this purpose there is a `private` field that can be used. However it is not a void pointer but is an `unsigned long`. Many places in the kernel assume an `unsigned long` and a `void *` are the same size and this is one of them. Most users of this field actually store a pointer here and have to cast it back and forth. The "buffer_head" library provides macros [`attach_page_buffers`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/buffer_head.h#L239) and [`page_buffers`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/buffer_head.h#L132) to set and get this field. 

So while `struct page` is not the most elegant example, it is an informative example of a case where unions and void pointers are the only option for providing data inheritance. 

#### The details of structure embedding

Where structure embedding can be used, and where the list of possible subtypes is not known in advance, it seems to be increasingly the preferred choice. To gain a full understanding of it we will again need to explore a little bit further than inodes and contrast data inheritance with other uses of structure embedding. 

There are essentially three uses for structure embedding - three reasons for including a structure within another structure. Sometimes there is nothing particularly interesting going on. Data items are collected together into structures and structures within structures simply to highlight the closeness of the relationships between the different items. In this case the address of the embedded structure is rarely taken, and it is never mapped back to the containing structure using `container_of()`. 

The second use is the data inheritance embedding that we have already discussed. The third is like it but importantly different. This third use is typified by `struct list_head` and other structs used as an [embedded anchor](/Articles/336255/) when creating abstract data types. 

The use of an embedded anchor like `struct list_head` can be seen as a style of inheritance as the structure containing it "is-a" member of a list by virtue of inheriting from `struct list_head`. However it is not a strict subtype as a single object can have several `struct list_head`s embedded - `struct inode` has six (if we include the similar `hlist_node`). So it is probably best to think of this sort of embedding more like a "mixin" style of inheritance. The `struct list_head` provides a service - that of being included in a list - that can be mixed-in to other objects, an arbitrary number of times. 

A key aspect of data inheritance structure embedding that differentiates it from each of the other two is the existence of a reference counter in the inner-most structure. This is an observation that is tied directly to the fact that the Linux kernel uses reference counting as the primary means of lifetime management and so would not be shared by systems that used, for example, garbage collection to manage lifetimes. 

In Linux, every object with an independent existence will have a reference counter, sometimes a simple `atomic_t` or even an `int`, though often a more explicit [`struct kref`](/Articles/336224/). When an object is created using several levels of inheritance the reference counter could be buried quite deeply. For example a `[struct usb_device](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/usb.h#L426)` embeds a `[struct device](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/device.h#L404)` which embeds `[struct kobject](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/kobject.h#L60)` which has a `[struct kref](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/include/linux/kref.h#L20)`. So `usb_device` (which might in turn be embedded in a structure for some specific device) does have a reference counter, but it is contained several levels down in the nest of structure embedding. This contrasts quite nicely with a `list_head` and similar structures. These have no reference counter, have no independent existence and simply provide a service to other data structures. 

Though it seems obvious when put this way, it is useful to remember that a single object cannot have two reference counters - at least not two lifetime reference counters (It is fine to have two counters like `s_active` and `s_count` in `struct super_block` which count different things). This means that multiple inheritance in the "data inheritance" style is not possible. The only form of multiple inheritance that can work is the mixin style used by `list_head` as mentioned above. 

It also means that, when designing a data structure, it is important to think about lifetime issues and whether this data structure should have its own reference counter or whether it should depend on something else for its lifetime management. That is, whether it is an object in its own right, or simply a service provided to other objects. These issues are not really new and apply equally to void pointer inheritance. However an important difference with void pointers is that it is relatively easy to change your mind later and switch an extension structure to be a fully independent object. Structure embedding requires the discipline of thinking clearly about the problem up front and making the right decision early - a discipline that is worth encouraging. 

The other key telltale for data inheritance structure embedding is the set of rules for allocating and initializing new instances of a structure, as has already been hinted at. When union or void pointer inheritance is used the main structure is usually allocated and initialized by common code (the mid-layer) and then a device specific `open()` or `create()` function is called which can optionally allocate and initialize any extension object. By contrast when structure embedding is used the structure needs to be allocated by the lowest level device driver which then initializes its own fields and calls in to common code to initialize the common fields. 

Continuing the `struct inode` example from above which has an `alloc_inode()` method in the super_block to request allocation, we find that initialization is provided for with [`inode_init_once()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/fs/inode.c#L342) and [`inode_init_always()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/fs/inode.c#L185) support functions. The first of these is used when the previous use of a piece of memory is unknown, the second is sufficient by itself when we know that the memory was previously used for some other inode. We see this same pattern of an initializer function separate from allocation in [`kobject_init()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/lib/kobject.c#L270), [`kref_init()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/lib/kref.c#L22), and [`device_initialize()`](http://lxr.linux.no/#linux+v2.6.39/drivers/base/core.c#L587). 

So apart from the obvious embedding of structures, the pattern of "data inheritance through structure embedding" can be recognized by the presence of a reference counter in the innermost structure, by the delegation of structure allocation to the final user of the structure, and by the provision of initializing functions which initialize a previously allocated structure. 

### Conclusion

In exploring the use of method dispatch (last week) and data inheritance (this week) in the Linux kernel we find that while some patterns seem to dominate they are by no means universal. While almost all data inheritance could be implemented using structure embedding, unions provide real value in a few specific cases. Similarly while simple vtables are common, mixin vtables are very important and the ability to delegate methods to a related object can be valuable. 

We also find that there are patterns in use with little to recommend them. Using void pointers for inheritance may have an initial simplicity, but causes longer term wastage, can cause confusion, and could nearly always be replaced by embedded inheritance. Using NULL pointers to indicate default behavior is similarly a poor choice - when the default is important there are better ways to provide for it. 

But maybe the most valuable lesson is that the Linux kernel is not only a useful program to run, it is also a useful document to study. Such study can find elegant practical solutions to real problems, and some less elegant solutions. The willing student can pursue the former to help improve their mind, and pursue the latter to help improve the kernel itself. With that in mind, the following exercises might be of interest to some. 

#### Exercises

  1. As inodes now use structure embedding for inheritance, void pointers should not be necessary. Examine the consequences and wisdom of removing "i_private" from "struct inode".

  2. Rearrange the three unions in `struct page` to just one union so that the enumeration of different subtypes is more explicit. 

  3. As was noted in the text, `struct seq_file` can be extended both through "void pointer" and a limited form of "union" data inheritance. Explain how `seq_open_private()` allows this structure to also be extended through "embedded structure" data inheritance and give an example by converting one usage in the kernel from "void pointer" to "embedded structure". Consider submitting a patch if this appears to be an improvement. Contrast this implementation of embedded structure inheritance with the mechanism used for inodes. 

  4. Though subtyping is widely used in the kernel, it is not uncommon for a object to contain fields that not all users are interested in. This can indicate that more fine grained subtyping is possible. As very many completely different things can be represented by a "file descriptor", it is likely that `struct file` could be a candidate for further subtyping. 

Identify the smallest set of fields that could serve as a generic `struct file` and explore the implications of embedding that in different structures to implement regular files, socket files, event files, and other file types. Exploring more general use of the proposed [`open()`](https://lkml.org/lkml/2011/5/17/182) method for inodes might help here. 

  5. Identify an "object-oriented" language which has an object model that would meet all the needs of the Linux kernel as identified in these two articles. 


  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Patterns](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Patterns)  
[GuestArticles](/Archives/GuestIndex/)| [Brown, Neil](/Archives/GuestIndex/#Brown_Neil)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
