# IPv6 NAT [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 20, 2011 

One of the nice things that the IPv6 protocol was supposed to do for us was to eliminate the need for network address translation (NAT). The address space is large enough that many of the motivations for the use of NAT (lack of addresses, having to renumber networks when changing providers) are no longer present. NAT is often seen as a hack which breaks the architecture of the Internet, so there has been no shortage of people who would be happy to see it go; the IPv6 switch has often looked like the opportunity to make it happen. 

So it is not surprising that, when Terry Moës posted [an IPv6 NAT implementation for Linux](/Articles/451914/), the first response was less than favorable. Anybody wanting to see the end of NAT is unlikely to welcome an implementation which can only serve to perpetuate its use after the IPv6 transition. The sad fact, though, is that NAT appears to be here to stay. David Miller [expressed it](/Articles/452294/) in a typically direct manner: 

People want to hide the details of the topology of their internal networks, therefore we will have NAT with ipv6 no matter what we think or feel. 

Everyone needs to stop being in denial, now. 

Like it or not, we will be dealing with NAT indefinitely. For those who are curious about how it might work in Linux, Terry's implementation can be found [on SourceForge](https://sourceforge.net/projects/nfnat66/) along with a paper describing the design of the code. Both stateless ([RFC 6296](http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6296)) and stateful NAT are supported.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Networking/IPv6](/Kernel/Index#Networking-IPv6)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
