# Broadcom's wireless drivers, one year later [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 29, 2011 

On September 9, 2010, Broadcom [announced](/Articles/404248/) that it was releasing an open source driver for its wireless networking chipsets. Broadcom had long resisted calls for free drivers for this hardware, so this announcement was quite well received in the community, despite the fact that the quality of the code itself was not quite up to contemporary kernel standards. One year later, this driver is again under discussion, but the tone of the conversation has changed somewhat. After a year of work, Broadcom's driver may never see a mainline release. 

Broadcom's submission was actually two drivers: brcmsmac for software-MAC chipsets, and brcmfmac for "FullMAC" chipsets with hardware MAC support. These drivers were immediately pulled into the staging tree with the understanding that there were a lot of things needing fixing before they could make the move to the mainline proper. In the following year, developers dedicated themselves to the task of cleaning up the drivers; nearly 900 changes have been merged in this time. The bulk of the changes came from Broadcom employees, but quite a few others have contributed fixes to the drivers as well. 

This work has produced a driver that is free of checkpatch warnings, works on both small-endian and big-endian platforms, uses kernel libraries where appropriate, and generally looks much better than it originally did. On August 24, Broadcom developer Henry Ptasinski decided that the time had come: he posted [a patch](/Articles/456707/) moving the Broadcom drivers into the mainline. Greg Kroah-Hartman, maintainer of the staging tree, [said](/Articles/456765/) that he was fine with the driver moving out of staging if the networking developers agreed. Some of those developers came up with some technical issues, but it appeared that these drivers were getting close to ready to make the big move out of staging. 

That was when Rafał Miłecki [chimed in](/Articles/456767/): ""Henry: a simple question, please explain it to me, what brcmsmac does provide that b43 doesn't?"" Rafał, naturally, is the maintainer of the b43 driver; b43, which has been in the mainline for years, is a driver for Broadcom chipsets developed primarily from reverse-engineered information. It has reached a point where, Rafał claims, it supports everything Broadcom's driver does with one exception (BCM4313 chipsets) that will be fixed soon. Rafał also claims that the b43 driver performs better, [supports hardware](/Articles/456768/) that brcmsmac does not, and is, in general, a better piece of code. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

So Rafał was clear on what he thought of the brcmsmac driver (brcmfmac didn't really enter into the discussion); he was also [quite clear](/Articles/456769/) on what he would like to see happen: 

We would like to have b43 supported by Broadcom. It sounds much better, I've shown you a lot of advantages of such a choice. Switching to brcmsmac on the other hand needs a lot of work and improvements. 

On one hand, Rafał is in a reasonably strong position. The b43 driver is in the mainline now; there is, in general, a strong resistance to the merging of duplicate drivers for the same hardware. Code quality is, to some extent, in the eye of the beholder, but there have been few beholders who have gone on record to say that they like Broadcom's driver better. Looking at the situation with an eye purely on the quality of the kernel's code base in the long term, it is hard to make an argument that the brcmsmac driver should move into the mainline. 

On the other hand, if one considers the feelings of developers and the desire to have more hardware companies supporting their products with drivers in the Linux kernel, one has to ask why Broadcom was allowed to put this driver into staging and merge hundreds of patches improving it if that driver was never going to make it into the mainline. Letting Broadcom invest that much work into its driver, then asking it to drop everything and support the reverse-engineered driver that it declined to support one year ago seems harsh. It's not a story that is likely to prove inspirational for developers in other companies who are considering trying to work more closely with the kernel community. 

What seems to have happened here (according mainly to a [history](/Articles/456773/) posted by Rafał, who is not a disinterested observer) is that, one year ago, the brcmsmac driver supported hardware that had no support in b43. Since then, b43 has gained support for that additional hardware; nobody objected to the addition of duplicated driver support at that time (as one would probably expect, given that the Broadcom driver was in staging). Rafał doesn't say whether the brcmsmac driver was helpful to him in filling out hardware support in the b43 driver. In the end, it doesn't matter; it would appear that the need for brcmsmac has passed. 

One of the most important lessons for kernel developers to learn is that one should focus on the end result rather than on the merging of a specific piece of code. One can argue that Broadcom has what it wanted now: free driver support for its hardware in the mainline kernel. One could also argue that Broadcom should have worked on adding support to b43 from the beginning rather than posting a competing driver. Or, failing that, one could say that the Broadcom developers should have noticed the improvements going into b43 and thought about the implications for their own work. But none of that is going to make the Broadcom developers feel any better about how things have turned out. They might come around to working on b43, but one expects that it is not a hugely appealing alternative at the moment. 

The kernel process can be quite wasteful - in terms of code and developer time lost - at times. Any kernel developer who has been in the community for a significant time will have invested significant time into code that went straight into the bit bucket at some time or other. But that doesn't mean that this waste is good or always necessary. There would be value in finding more reliable ways to warn developers when they are working on code that is unlikely to be merged. Kernel development is distributed, and there are no managers paying attention to how developers spend their time; it works well in general, but it can lead to situations where developers work at cross purposes and somebody, eventually, has to lose out. 

That would appear to have happened here. In the short term, the kernel and its users have come out ahead: we have a choice of drivers for Broadcom wireless chipsets and can pick the best one to carry forward. Even Broadcom can be said to have come out ahead if it gains better support for its hardware under Linux. Whether we will pay a longer-term cost in developers who conclude that the kernel community is too hard to work with is harder to measure. But it remains true that the kernel community can, at times, be a challenging place to work.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Broadcom 43xx](/Kernel/Index#Broadcom_43xx)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Driver merging](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Driver_merging)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Device drivers/Wireless networking](/Kernel/Index#Device_drivers-Wireless_networking)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
