# Where's that tree? [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 21, 2011 

As of this writing, the kernel.org outage continues with no word as to when the site will be back up. Kernel development never stops, though, and one of the advantages of the git model is that copies of repositories exist all over the place. A number of developers have announced new locations for their trees; some of the relocated repositories are: 

> ACPI| https://github.com/lenb/linux.git  
> ---|---  
> ALSA SOC| git://opensource.wolfsonmicro.com/linux-2.6-asoc.git  
> amd64 EDAC| git://amd64.org/linux/bp.git  
> APM| git://twin.jikos.cz/jikos/apm  
> arm-soc| git://git.linaro.org/people/arnd/arm-soc.git  
> HID| git://twin.jikos.cz/jikos/hid  
> infiniband|  https://github.com/rolandd/infiniband  
> input| https://github.com/dtor/input  
> kbuild| http://repo.or.cz/w/linux-kbuild.git  
> libata| git://github.com/jgarzik/libata-dev.git  
> mmc| git://dev.laptop.org/users/cjb/mmc mmc-next  
> pm| git://github.com/rjwysocki/linux-pm.git  
> regmap| git://opensource.wolfsonmicro.com/regmap.git  
> SCSI| git://bedivere.hansenpartnership.com/git/scsi-rc-fixes-2.6.git  
>  git://bedivere.hansenpartnership.com/git/scsi-misc-2.6.git  
> slab| git://github.com/penberg/linux.git  
> tip| git://tesla.tglx.de/git/linux-2.6-tip  
> trivial| git://twin.jikos.cz/jikos/trivial  
> wireless| git://git.infradead.org/users/linville/wireless.git  
>  git://git.infradead.org/users/linville/wireless-next.git  
>  git://git.infradead.org/users/linville/wireless-testing.git  
> xen| git://oss.oracle.com/git/kwilk/xen.git  
  
Most of these relocations have been advertised as being temporary. It will be interesting to see how many of them move back to kernel.org on its return, especially if that site comes back with stricter rules about access.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development tools/Infrastructure](/Kernel/Index#Development_tools-Infrastructure)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
