# A /proc/PID/mem vulnerability [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jake Edge**  
January 25, 2012 

A privilege escalation in the kernel is always a serious threat that leads kernel hackers and distributions to scramble to close the hole quickly. That's exactly what happened after a January 17 [report from Jüri Aedla](http://kodu.ut.ee/~asd/exp-0-aedla/report.html) to the closed kernel security mailing list. But most people didn't learn of the hole from Aedla (since he posted to a closed list), but instead from Jason Donenfeld (aka zx2c4) who posted a [detailed look at the flaw](http://blog.zx2c4.com/749) on January 22\. The fix was made by Linus Torvalds and [went into the mainline](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux-2.6.git;a=commitdiff;h=e268337dfe26dfc7efd422a804dbb27977a3cccc) on January 17, though with a commit message that obfuscated the security implications—something that didn't sit well with some. 

#### The problem and exploit

The problem itself stems from the [removal of the restriction on writes to `/proc/PID/mem`](http://git.kernel.org/?p=linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux-2.6.git;a=commitdiff;h=198214a7) that was merged for the 2.6.39 kernel. It was part of a [patch set](/Articles/433326/) that was specifically targeted at allowing debuggers to write to the memory of processes easily via the `/proc/PID/mem` file. Unfortunately, it left open a hole that Aedla and Donenfeld (at least) were able to exploit. 

The posting by Donenfeld is worth a read for those interested in how exploits of this sort are created. The problem starts with the fact that the `open()` call for `/proc/PID/mem` does no additional checking beyond the normal VFS permissions before returning a file descriptor. That will prove to be a mistake, and one that Torvalds's fix remedies. Instead of checks at `open()` time, the code would check in `write()` and only allow writing if the process being written to is the same as the process doing the writing (i.e. `task == current`). 

That restriction seems like it would make an exploit difficult, but it can be avoided with an `exec()` and coercing the newly run program to do the writing to itself. That will be dangerous if the newly run program is a setuid executable for example. But there is another test that is meant to block that particular path, by testing that `current->self_exec_id` has the same value as it did at `open()` time. `self_exec_id` is incremented every time that a process does an `exec()`, so it will definitely be different after executing the setuid binary. But, since it is simply incremented, one can arrange (via `fork()`) to have a child process with the same `self_exec_id` as the main process _after_ the setuid `exec()` is done. 

The child with the "correct" `self_exec_id` value (which it gets by doing an `exec()`) can then open the parent's `/proc/PID/mem` file (since there are no extra checks on the `open()`) and pass the descriptor back to the parent via Unix sockets. The parent then needs to arrange that the setuid executable writes to that file descriptor once a `seek()` to the proper address has been done. Finding that proper address and getting the binary to write to the `fd` are the final pieces of the puzzle. 

Donenfeld's example uses `su` because it is not compiled as a position-independent executable (PIE) for most distributions, which makes it easier to figure out which address to use. He exploits the fact that `su` prints an error message when it is passed an unknown username and the error message helpfully prints the username passed. That allows the exploit to pass shellcode (i.e. binary machine language that spawns a shell when executed) as the argument to `su`. 

After printing the error message, `su` calls the `exit()` function (really `exit@plt`), which is what Donenfeld's exploit overwrites. It finds the address of the function using `objdump`, subtracts the length of the error message that gets printed before the argument, and seeks the file to that location. It uses `dup2()` to connect `stderr` to the `/proc/PID/mem` file descriptor and execs `su "shellcode"`. 

In pseudocode, it might look something like this: 
    
    
        if (!child && fork()) {  /* child flag set based on -c */
            /* first program invocation, this is parent, wait for fd from child */
    	fd = recv_fd();  /* get the fd from the child */
    	dup2(2, 15);
    	dup2(fd, 2);  /* make fd be stderr */
    	lseek(fd, offset);  /* offset to overwrite location */
    	exec("/bin/su", shellcode);  /* will have self_exec_id == 1 */
        }
        else if (!child) {
            /* this is the child from the fork(), exec with child flag */
            exec("thisprog", "-c");  /* this program with -c (child) */
        }
        else {
            /* child after exec, will have self_exec_id == 1 */
            fd = open("/proc/PPID/mem", O_RDWR); /* open parent PID's mem file */
            send_fd(fd);  /* send the fd to the parent */
        }
    

Of course Aedla's [proof-of-concept](http://kodu.ut.ee/~asd/exp-0-aedla/exp-0-aedla.c) or Donenfeld's [exploit code](http://git.zx2c4.com/CVE-2012-0056/tree/mempodipper.c) are likely to be even more instructive. 

It's obviously a complicated multi-step process, but it is also a completely reliable way to get root privileges. Updates to Donenfeld's post show exploits for distributions like Fedora that do build `su` as a PIE, or for Gentoo where the read permissions on setuid binaries have been removed so `objdump` can't be used to find the address of the exit function. For Fedora, `gpasswd` can be substituted as it is not built as a PIE, while on Gentoo, `ptrace()` can be used to find the needed address. While it was believed that address space layout randomization (ASLR) for PIEs would make exploitation much more difficult, that proved to be only a small hurdle, at least on 32-bit systems. 

#### The fix and reactions

The fix hit the mainline without any coordination with Linux distributions. Kees Cook, who works on ChromeOS security (and formerly was a member of the Ubuntu security team), told LWN that Red Hat has a person on the closed kernel security mailing list, so it was aware of the problem but did not share that information on the Linux distribution security list. ""I've been told this will change in the future, but I'm worried it will be overlooked again"", he said. The first indication that other distributions had was likely from Red Hat's Eugene Teo's [request for a CVE](http://seclists.org/oss-sec/2012/q1/178) on the oss-security mailing list. 

As Cook points out, the abrupt public disclosure of the bug (via a mainline commit) runs counter to the policy described in the kernel's [Documentation/SecurityBugs](/Articles/477100/) file, where the default policy is to leave roughly seven days between reports to the mailing list and public disclosure to allow time for vendors to fix the problem. Cook is concerned that bugs reported to security@kernel.org are not being handled reasonably: 

The current behavior of security@kernel.org harms end users, harms distros, and harms security researchers, all while ignoring their own published standards of notification. I have repeatedly seen the security@kernel.org list hold a double-standard of "it is urgent to publish this security fix" and "it's just a bug like any other bug". If it were just a bug, there should be no problem in delaying publication. If it were an urgent security fix, all the distros should be notified. 

The "just a bug" refers to statements that Torvalds has made over the years about security bugs being no different than any other kind of bug. In email, Torvalds described it this way: 

To me, a bug is a bug. Nothing more, nothing less. Some bugs are critical, but it's not about some random "security" crap - it could be because it causes a machine to crash, or it could be because it causes some user application to misbehave. 

In keeping with that philosophy, Torvalds does not disclose the security relevance of a fix in the commit message: ""I think the whole 'mark this patch as having security implications' is pure and utter garbage"". Even if there is a known security problem that is being fixed, his commit messages do not reflect that, as with the message for the `/proc/PID/mem` fix: 

Jüri Aedla reported that the /proc/<pid>/mem handling really isn't very robust, and it also doesn't match the permission checking of any of the other related files. 

This changes it to do the permission checks at open time, and instead of tracking the process, it tracks the VM at the time of the open. That simplifies the code a lot, but does mean that if you hold the file descriptor open over an execve(), you'll continue to read from the _old_ VM. 

Torvalds's commit message stands in pretty stark contrast to Aedla's report to security@kernel.org (linked above): 

I have found a privilege escalation vulnerability, introduced by making /proc/<pid>/mem writable. It is possible to open /proc/self/mem as stdout or stderr before executing a SUID. This leads to SUID writing to it's own memory. 

This "masking" of the actual reason for a commit doesn't sit well with either Cook or Teo (who also responded to an email query). Cook ""cannot overstate how much I am against this kind of masking"", while Teo pointed out that this particular bug is in no way unique: 

There are many kernel vulnerabilities that were fixed silently in the upstream kernel. This is not the first one, nor will be the last one I'm afraid. 

Both Teo and Cook were in agreement that disclosing what is known about a fix at the time it is applied can only help distributions and others trying to track kernel development. Torvalds, on the other hand, is concerned about attackers reading commit messages, which could lead to more attacks against Linux systems. He has a well-known contempt for security "clowns" that seems to also factor into his reasoning: 

So I just ignore the idiots, and go "fix things asap, but try not to help black hats". No games, no crap, just get the damn work done and don't make a circus out of it. 

Both the security camps hate me. The full disclosure people think I try to hide things (which is true), while the embargo people think I despise their corrupt arses (which is also true). 

The strange thing is that by explicitly _not_ putting the known security implications of a patch into the commit message, Torvalds _is_ treating security bugs differently. They are no longer "just bugs" because some of the details of the bug are being purposely omitted. That may make it difficult for "black hats"—though it would be somewhat surprising if it did—but it definitely makes it more difficult for those who are trying to keep Linux users secure. Worse yet, it makes it more difficult down the road when someone is looking at a commit (or reversion) in isolation because they may miss out on some important context. 

Silent security fixes are a hallmark of proprietary software, and Torvalds's policy resembles that to some extent. It could be argued (and presumably would be by Torvalds and others) that the fixes aren't _silent_ since they go into a public repository and that is true—as far as it goes. By deliberately omitting important information about the bug, which is _not_ done for most or all other bugs, perhaps they aren't so much silent as they are "muted" or, sadly, "covered up". There is definitely a lot of validity to Torvalds's complaints about the security "circus", but his reaction to that circus may not be in the best interests of the kernel community either. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Vulnerabilities](/Kernel/Index#Security-Vulnerabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Vulnerabilities/Privilege escalation](/Security/Index/#Vulnerabilities-Privilege_escalation)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
