# A sys_poll() ABI tweak [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
February 22, 2012 

The `poll()` system call has three parameters, one of which is a timeout value specifying an upper bound (in milliseconds) for how long the process will wait. The manual page indicates that the type of this value is `int`. For reasons lost in history, though, the kernel's internal implementation of `poll()` has always expected the timeout value to be a `long` integer. And that has created a source of occasional bugs. 

Most of the time, things just work. The `int` and `long` types tend to be the same on most architectures, and, in cases where they are different, glibc sign-extends the timeout value appropriately. Things go wrong, though, when a 32-bit process is running on an x86-64 system. In that case, the 32-bit `sys_poll()` function just passes the timeout value directly to the native kernel version, without sign extension. So if the timeout value is negative (an indication that `poll()` should wait forever if need be), the kernel will eventually see a large, positive timeout instead. 

There are various ways this problem could be fixed. What Linus has chosen to do, though, is to just change the type of the timeout parameter to `int` inside the kernel. Since the timeout is now a 32-bit quantity on all systems, that particular source of confusion is removed. There is a small risk to this approach, though: it is possible that some program somewhere was actually making use of 64-bit timeouts. Doing so would require replacing or bypassing glibc (because its sign extension makes 64-bit timeouts unusable), so it's unlikely that anybody has bothered, but one never knows. If this change were to break a real application, it would have to be reverted in favor of a more complicated solution. 

Linus's [patch](/Articles/483083/) was merged for 3.3-rc5, so anybody who objects has a few weeks to make their concerns known.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/User-space ABI](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-User-space_ABI)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
