# Fixing the unfixable autofs ABI [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
April 30, 2012
One of the few hard rules of kernel development is that breaking the
user-space binary interface is not acceptable.  If there is user-space code
that depends on specific behavior, that behavior must be maintained
regardless of how inconvenient that may be.  But what is to be done if two
different programs depend on mutually-incompatible behaviors, so that it is
seemingly impossible to keep them both working?  The answer may be to
violate another rule by putting an ugly hack into the kernel—or to do
something rather more tricky.
The "autofs" protocol is used to communicate between the kernel and an
automounter daemon.  It allows the automounter to set up special virtual
filesystems that, when referenced by user space, can be replaced by a
remote-mounted real filesystem.  Much of this protocol is implemented with
ioctl()
calls on a special autofs device, but it also makes use of
pipes between the kernel and user space when specific filesystems are
mounted.
This protocol is certainly part of the kernel ABI, so its components have
been defined with some care.  One of the key elements of the autofs
protocol is the
autofs_v5_packet
structure, which is sent from the
kernel to user space via a pipe; it is used, among other things, to report
that a filesystem has been idle for some time and should be unmounted.
This structure looks like:
struct autofs_v5_packet {
	struct autofs_packet_hdr hdr;
	autofs_wqt_t wait_queue_token;
	__u32 dev;
	__u64 ino;
	__u32 uid;
	__u32 gid;
	__u32 pid;
	__u32 tgid;
	__u32 len;
	char name[NAME_MAX+1];
    };
The size of every field is precisely defined, so this structure should look
the same on both 32- and 64-bit systems.  And it does, except for one tiny
little problem.  The size of the structure as defined is 300 bytes, which
is not divisible by eight.  So if two of these structures were to be placed
contiguously in memory, the 64-bit
ino
field would have to be
misaligned in one of them.  To avoid this problem, the compiler will, on
64-bit systems, round the size of the structure up to a multiple of eight,
adding four bytes of padding at the end.
So
sizeof()
on
struct autofs_v5_packet
will return 300 on
a 32-bit system, and 304 on a 64-bit system.
That disparity is not a problem most of the time, but there is an
exception.  Automounting is one of the many tasks being assimilated by the
systemd daemon.  When systemd reads one of the above structures from the
kernel, it checks the size of what it read against its idea of the size of
the structure to ensure that everything is
operating as it should be.  That check works just fine, as long as systemd
and the kernel agree on that size.  And normally they do,
but there is an exception: if systemd is running as a 32-bit process on a
64-bit kernel, it will get a 304-byte structure when it is expecting 300
bytes.  At that point, systemd concludes that something has gone wrong and
gives up.
In February, Ian Kent merged
a
patch
to deal with this problem.  One could be forgiven for calling the
solution hacky: on 64-bit systems, the kernel's automount code will
subtract four from the size of that structure if (and only if) it is
talking with a user-space client running in 32-bit mode.  This patch makes
systemd work in this situation; it was merged for 3.3-rc5 and fast-tracked
into the various stable kernel releases.  Everybody then lived happily ever
after.
...except they didn't.  It seems that the
automount
program from
the autofs-tools package, which is still in use on a great many systems,
had run into this problem a number of years ago.  At that time, the
autofs-tools developers decided to work around the problem in user space.
So, if automount determines that it is running in 32-bit mode on a 64-bit
kernel (Linus
has little respect
for how
that determination is done, incidentally), it will correct its idea of what
the structure size should be.  If the kernel messes with that size, the
automount "fix" no longer works, so Ian's patch fixes systemd at the cost of
breaking automount.
So we are now in a situation where two deployed programs have different
ideas of how the autofs protocol should work.  On pure 32- or 64-bit
systems, both programs work just fine, but, depending on which kernel is
being run, one or the other of the two will break in the 32-on-64
configuration.  If Ian's patch remains, some users will be most unhappy,
but reverting it will upset other users.  It is, in other words, a somewhat
unfortunate situation.
Unfortunate, but not necessarily unrecoverable.  One possible way to fix
things can be seen in
this patch
from
Michael Tokarev.  In short, this patch looks at the name of the current
command (
current->comm
) and compares it against
"
automount
".  If the currently-running program is called
"automount," the structure-size tweak is not applied and things work
again.  For any other program (including systemd), the previous fix
remains.  So things are fixed at the expense of having the kernel ABI
depend on the name of the running program.  At best, this solution can be
described as "inelegant."  At worst, there may be some other, unknown
program with a different name that breaks in the same way automount does;
any such program will remain broken with this fix in place.
Still, Linus has
conceded
that "
it's
probably what we have to go with
".  But he preferred to look for
a less kludgy and more robust solution.  One possibility was for the kernel
to look at the
size of the
read()
operation that would obtain the
autofs_v5_packet
structure prior to writing that structure; if that size is either 300 or
304, the kernel could give the 
calling program the size it is expecting.  The problem here is that
the
read()
operation is hidden behind the pipe, so the autofs
code does not actually have access to the size of the buffer provided by
user space.
So Linus came up with a different solution, the concept of "
packetized pipes
".  A packetized pipe
resembles the normal kind with a couple of exceptions: each
write()
is kept in a separate buffer, and a
read()
consumes an entire buffer, even if the size of the read is smaller than the
amount of data in the buffer.  With a packetized pipe, the kernel can
always just write the larger (304-byte) structure size; if user space is
only trying to read 300 bytes, then it will get what it expects and be
happy.  So there is no need for special hacks in the kernel, just a
slightly different type of pipe dynamics.  Following a suggestion from Alan
Cox, Linus made an open with
O_DIRECT
turn on the packetized
behavior, so user space can create such pipes if need be.
After a couple of false starts, Linus got this patch working and merged it
just prior to the 3.4-rc5 release.  So the 3.4 kernel should work fine for
either automount or systemd.
The kernel community got a bit lucky here; it was possible for a suitably
clever and motivated developer to figure out a way to give both programs
what they expect and make the system work for everybody.  The next time
this kind of problem arises, the solution may not be so simple.  
Maintaining ABI stability is not always easy or fun, but it is necessary to
keep the system viable in the long term.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Development model/User-space ABI
Kernel
Filesystems/autofs
to post comments