# LinuxCon Japan: One zImage to rule them all [LWN.net]

By
Jake Edge
June 13, 2012
An elusive, but highly sought after goal for Linux on ARM is to have a
"single" kernel image that can boot on all ARM devices.  The full goal is
likely not attainable, but reducing the number of different ARM kernels is,
and progress is being made.  Linaro kernel tech lead Deepak Saxena reported
on the motivations behind the consolidation effort as well as progress
toward the goal at LinuxCon Japan 2012.
The holy grail
Saxena started with a problem statement.  He noted that those who have
worked with ARM for a while may not really see the problem, but it
is
a problem that every ARM processor needs its own kernel.  For
example, a laptop vendor that makes a few small hardware changes will almost
certainly need a separate kernel for each revision.
The "holy grail" is a single kernel binary that will boot on any ARM
device, he said.
Requiring separate kernels "creates a lot of extra work" for developers.
If they are building a driver for multiple platforms—or even three
revisions of the same platform—they will probably need to build and
test a kernel for each.  Sometimes there is a register that can be read to
determine the hardware revision, thus reducing the number of different
kernels, but that often is not the case.
For distributions, supporting ARM is difficult right now.  Debian, for
example, has  different kernels for the BeagleBoard, PandaBoard, and
others.  In the consumer electronics and mobile space, the problem is
similar, and those companies want to reduce the amount of testing that
needs to be done.  Right now, we think of cell phones more than anything
else, but the Saxena pointed to the video projector and camera as devices
that are also likely ARM-powered.  Beyond that, there will soon be ARM servers.
The model in the server/enterprise world is very different than mobile.
Typically, a mobile device comes with a full software stack, and updates come the
same way, but that is not the case for servers.  You may or may not get the
distribution that you want on servers and, in fact, may get Windows on
those systems.  That means that distributions need to have installation
media that can work on a wide variety of server platforms.
"The distros have spoken", Saxena said, and they need one kernel image that
can be built, booted, and tested on all of the different platforms.  There
are thousands of different x86-based laptops today, and you don't need a
different kernel for each.  The Linux ARM community wants to get to that
same model.  Beyond that, cloud and hyperscale computing also need to be
able to deploy on lots of different platforms without requiring separate
kernels.
"How did we get here?", he asked; you can boot a single Ubuntu or Fedora
install disk on all x86 systems, but that is not true for ARM.  Part of the
problem is the diversity in the ARM world.  There is also a lot of
fragmentation in how code has been written to support Linux on ARM.  There
are multiple implementations for the same IP block, for example. Functionality has
been duplicated at least partly because of a closed-door policy by the
various ARM vendors.
In addition, Linux ARM maintainer Russell King got overloaded, which led
ARM platform and system-on-chip (SoC) developers to start pushing their
code to Linus Torvalds directly.  Saxena said that he may have been the
first to do that, for ixp4xx, but now he sees the problems that
caused and apologized for doing so.  It led to an inability for anyone to
track the "big picture" in Linux ARM support, he said.
Fixes needed
It is now a multi-faceted problem that requires several different avenues
of attack to clean up.  Saxena identified four areas that are being
pursued.  Cleaning up and consolidating the header files within the various
ARM machine and platform trees is one, while consolidating ARM drivers is
another.  In addition, device tree will provide a way to specify the
differences between ARM SoCs at runtime.  Finally, doing active maintenance
of the ARM tree, keeping in mind the big picture, will also help.  No one
of those fixes the problem, but all of them together get us closer to the
holy grail, he said.
To start with, there are various header file collisions in the 
ARM tree.  There are a bunch of
arm/arch/mach-*
directories, one
for each of the machine types.  Each of those has an
include/mach
directory that maps to the top-level
include/mach
directory at
build time.  In order to build for multiple machine types, those header files
need to be consolidated in one place so that the remapping doesn't need to
happen.
In the 3.0 kernel tree, which was around the time the consolidation effort
started, there were 64 different machine types in the tree.  Some of those
machine types are similar and could be consolidated.  For the others, there
are lots of overlapping symbols that need to be dealt with.  The goal is to
get rid of as many of those as possible either by making them generic for
all ARMs or by moving platform-specific symbols to non-generic header files.
There were also 577 occurrences
of
#include <mach/*>
in the
drivers
directory.  Unfortunately, ARM has a lot of driver-specific definitions in
the architecture headers, which means that drivers depend on
arch/arm
header files.  Basically, it is prevalent for ARM drivers
to require definitions from both the driver directories and the
architecture headers, which makes it difficult to build multi-platform
kernels.
Linaro and the ARM community started working on these problems last year.
They met in August and thought they could have a solution in relatively
short order, but that proved not to be the case.  Some changes require
coordination between multiple maintainers and others are awaiting agreement
between maintainers on how to proceed.  The problem "may seem trivial at
first", Saxena said, but it actually fairly complicated.  The hope is to
have a single zImage for multiple systems by the end of 2012.
Beyond the header file issue, there is a need to cleanup and consolidate
the drivers in the tree.  The problem is not directly related to creating a
single kernel, but fixing it will help to get there, he said.  There are lots
of implementations of drivers for the same hardware in the tree, sometimes
with a different API.  That can cause problems with overlapping symbols and
code bloat.
The clock management code is the "epitome of code duplication and
fragmentation" in the ARM kernels, Saxena said.  The
clk.h
file,
which declares a
struct clk
, was introduced in 2.6.16 back in
2006. Since then, 27 different
struct clk
implementations
have been added to the tree, each with its own API and semantics. Over the
last two years or more, work has been done to create a common definition
and API, though the job is not done yet, as there is ongoing discussion on
certain parts.
Pinmux is another example of duplication.  It is a subsystem to manage the
pins on SoCs and there were multiple implementations of that
functionality. The problem is not as bad as
struct clk
, he
said, but there was still a need to consolidate.  After six months of work,
a
common pinmux implementation
is now
upstream, though there are still 
discussions about certain parts of the implementation and API.
Another piece of the solution is device tree.  Before device tree, very
small, simple changes to the hardware would require a kernel rebuild
because the information about IRQ lines, memory maps, and so forth were
statically defined.  Device tree makes it so that much of this information
can be probed at boot time.
Using device tree means creating a source file using a "simple markup
language" that defines the hardware.  It can specify where the registers
are or what the interrupts are for a particular device.  That means that
the same kernel can be used on a new SoC once a device tree file has been
created for that SoC.  Since the kernel will not have to change, it makes
hardware revisions and testing multiple devices that much easier.
Status and plans
Currently, a single kernel can be built for the four Linaro member
platforms (imx, omap2, ux500 and vexpress), though only the Versatile
Express board boots at this point. 
The goal is to have all four booting by the end of the year.  Linaro is
focused on its member platforms, but would like to get other platforms
supported as well.  That is even more reason for SoC vendors to get their
code upstream, Saxena said, as it will be more difficult to participate in
the multi-platform kernel effort with code that is out of the mainline.
The ARM SoC tree has been used as the base, with Arnd Bergmann maintaining
a branch for the multi-platform work.
There are, of course, things still left to do.  USB drivers need to be
consolidated as there are some problems building multiple host controllers into
one kernel at this point.  Finishing the device tree conversion is another
piece of the puzzle; the infrastructure is there, but there are lots of
drivers and board files to convert.  At the moment there is something of a
hack around the "driver
#include
madness", which needs to be
cleaned up for real.
While the holy grail has not been reached, things will be better than they
are today, Saxena said.  Due to micro-architecture and page table
differences, four kernels are envisioned: ARM v6/7 with large physical
address extensions (lpae), ARM v6/7 non-lpae, ARM v4/5, and, eventually,
ARM v8.  It still means multiple kernel binaries, but that could be treated in
the same way that the distributions handle various CPU extensions in the
x86 world.  The idea of "one zImage to rule them all" turns out to not be
practical, but we will end up with far fewer ARM kernel binaries in the
near future.
[ The author would like to thank the Linux Foundation for assisting with
travel to Yokohama for LinuxCon Japan 2012. ]
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Architectures/Arm
Conference
LinuxCon Japan/2012
to post comments