# Supporting 64-bit ARM systems [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 10, 2012 

ARM is one of the most successful processor architectures ever created; most of us possess several ARM cores for every x86 processor we have. ARM is very much thought of as an embedded systems processor; it is focused on minimal power use and the ability to be built into a variety of system-on-chip configurations. The "small systems" image of ARM is certainly encouraged by the fact that ARM processors are all 32-bit only. That situation is about to change, though, with the arrival of 64-bit ARM processors. Linux will be ready for these systems — the first set of 64-bit ARM support patches have just been posted — but there is still some debate around a couple of fundamental decisions. 

One might well wonder whether a 64-bit ARM processor is truly needed. 64-bit computing seems a bit rich even for the fanciest handsets or tablets, much less for the kind of embedded controllers where ARM processors predominate. But mobile devices are beginning to push the memory-addressing limits of 32-bit systems; even a 1GB system requires the use of high memory in most configurations. So, even if the heavily foreshadowed ARM server systems never materialize, there will be a need for 64-bit ARM processors just to be able to efficiently use the memory that future mobile devices will have. "Mobile" and "embedded" no longer mean "tiny." 

Naturally, Linux support is an important precondition to a successful 64-bit ARM processor introduction, so ARM has been supporting work in that area for some time. The [initial GCC patches](http://gcc.gnu.org/ml/gcc-patches/2012-05/msg01694.html) were posted back in May, and the [first set of kernel patches](/Articles/505682/) was posted by Catalin Marinas on July 6. All this code exists despite the fact that no 64-bit ARM hardware is yet available; it all has been developed on simulators. Once the hardware shows up, with luck, the software will work with a minimum of tweaking required. 

64-bit ARM support involves the addition of thousands of lines of new code via a 36-part patch set. There are some novel features, such as the ability to run with a 64KB native memory page size, and a lot of important technical decisions to be reviewed. So the kernel developers did what one would expect: they started complaining about the name given to the architecture. That name ("AArch64") strikes many as simultaneously redundant (of course it is an architecture) and uninformative (what does "A" stand for?). Many would prefer either ARMv8 (which is the actual hardware architecture name—"AArch64" is ARMv8's 64-bit operating mode) or arm64. 

Arguments in favor of the current name include the fact that it is already used to identify the architecture in the ELF triplet used in binaries; using the same name everywhere should help to reduce confusion. But, then, as Arnd Bergmann [noted](/Articles/506158/): ""If everything else is aarch64, we should use that in the kernel directory too, but if everyone calls it arm64 anyway, we should probably use that name for as many things as possible."" Jon Masters [added](/Articles/506159/) that, in classic contrarian style, he likes the name as it is; Fedora is planning to use "aarch64" as the name for its 64-bit ARM releases. Others, such as [Ingo Molnar](/Articles/506160/), argue in favor of changing the name now when it is relatively easy to do. Catalin [seems inclined](/Articles/506161/) to keep the current name but says he will think about it before posting the next version of the patch series. 

An arguably more substantive question was raised by a number of developers: wouldn't it make more sense to unify the 32-bit and 64-bit ARM implementations from the outset? A number of other architectures (x86, PowerPC, SPARC, and MIPS) all started with separate implementations, but ended up merging them later on, usually with some significant pain involved. Rather than leave that pain for future ARM developers, it has been suggested that, perhaps, it would be better to start with a unified implementation. 

There are a lot of reasons given for the separate 64-bit ARM architecture implementation. Much of the relevant thinking can be found in [this note from Arnd](/Articles/506165/). The 64-bit ARM instruction set is completely different from the 32-bit variety, to the point that there is no possibility of writing assembly code that works on both architectures. The system call interfaces also differ significantly, with the 64-bit version taking a more standard approach and leaving a lot of legacy code behind. The 64-bit implementation hopes to leave the entire 32-bit ARM "platform" concept behind as well; indeed, as Jon [put it](/Articles/506169/), there are hopes that it will be possible to have a single kernel binary that runs on all 64-bit ARM systems from the outset. In general, it is said, giving AArch64 a clean start in its own top-level hierarchy will make it possible to leave a lot of ARM baggage behind and will result in a better implementation overall. 

Others were quick to point out that most of these arguments have been heard in the context of other architectures. x86_64 was also meant to be a clean start that dumped a lot of old i386 code. In the end, things have turned out otherwise. It may be possible that things are different here; 32-bit ARM has rather more legacy baggage than other architectures did, and the processor differences seem to be larger. Some have said that the proper comparison is with x86 and ia64, though one gets the sense that the AArch64 developers don't want to be seen in the same light as ia64 in general. 

This decision will come down to what the AArch64 developers want, in the end; it's up to them to produce a working implementation and to maintain it into the future. If they insist that it should be a separate top-level architecture, it is unlikely that others will block its merging for that reason alone. Of course, it will also be up to those developers to manage a merger of the two in the future, should that prove to be necessary. If nothing else, life as a separate top-level architecture will allow some experimentation without the fear of breaking older 32-bit systems; the result could be a better unified architecture some years from now, should things move in that direction. 

Thus far, there has been little in the way of deeper technical criticism of the AArch64 patch set. Things may stay that way. The code has already been through a number of rounds of private review involving prominent developers, so the worst problems should already have been found and addressed. Few developers have the understanding of this new processor that would be necessary to truly understand much of the code. So it may go into the mainline kernel (perhaps as early as 3.7) without a whole lot of substantial changes. After that, all that will be needed is actual hardware; then things should get truly interesting.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Architectures/Arm](/Kernel/Index#Architectures-Arm)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
