# 3.6 merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 25, 2012 

Linus traditionally waits for a day or so after a major release before beginning to merge patches for the next cycle, but, with 3.6, he started right in. As of this writing, some 4,300 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline; much of the activity thus far has been from the networking and ARM subsystems. Significant user-visible changes include: 

  * The perf events subsystem now has support for the "uncore" performance measurement unit on Intel Nehalem and Sandy Bridge CPUs. 

  * The x86 architecture now supports the `reboot=bios` and `reboot-cpu` command-line options on 64-bit processors (as well as on 32-bit, which has been supported for a long time) 

  * "Suspend to both" support allows the system to be suspended after writing a hibernation image to disk. Then, should power run out before the suspended system is resumed, it can be restarted from the disk image instead. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

  * The CANFD extension to the controller area network (CAN) protocol is now supported. 

  * Numerous netfilter modules have gained proper namespace support. The netfilter [user-space connection tracking helper infrastructure](/Articles/500196/) has also been merged. 

  * The Bluetooth layer now has "three-wire UART" support, enabling Bluetooth operations over serial port connections. 

  * The [TCP small queues](/Articles/507065/) patch set, another piece of the solution to the bufferbloat problem, has been merged. 

  * The [TCP fast open](/Articles/458610/) protocol extension has been merged. TCP fast open is a patch out of Google that reduces the overhead of TCP connection setup, hopefully making protocols like HTTP go faster. 

  * A long effort to remove the IPv4 routing cache from the networking subsystem has come to its conclusion. David Miller wrote: 

The ipv4 routing cache is non-deterministic, performance wise, and is subject to reasonably easy to launch denial of service attacks. The routing cache works great for well behaved traffic, and the world was a much friendlier place when the tradeoffs that led to the routing cache's design were considered. 

What it boils down to is that the performance of the routing cache is a product of the traffic patterns seen by a system rather than being a product of the contents of the routing tables. 

The replacement code simplifies the networking subsystem and, hopefully, gives better performance on high-volume systems. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **Processors and systems** : Freescale BSC9131RDB reference boards, Altera SOCFPGA Cyclone V systems, Marvell Armada 370 and Armada XP boards, TI OMAP5 processors, TI EVMC6678LE evaluation boards, and Freescale (Motorola) Coldfire 5251/5253 and 5441x processors. 

    * **Audio** : TI Isabelle audio ICs, ST-Ericsson AB8500 codecs, Dialog DA732x audio codecs Wolfson Micro WM5102 and WM5110 audio controllers, and ST STA529 audio amplifiers. 

    * **Input** : Lenovo ThinkPad USB keyboards with trackpoint and Roccat Savu gaming mice. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : Samsung S2MPS11 voltage regulators, Maxim 77686 voltage regulators, TI/National Semiconductor LP8720/LP8725 voltage regulators, Dialog Semiconductor DA9052 PMICs, Honeywell Humidicon HIH-6130/HIH-6131 humidity sensors, Wolfson Micro WM831x and WM832x PMICs, and NVIDIA Tegra20 APB DMA controllers. 

    * **Networking** : RealTek rt3290 WiFi controllers, Sony PaSoRi contactless reader NFC controllers, Atmel RF230/231 radio transceivers, Broadcom BCM8706 and BCM8727 PHYs, and Asix AX88172A USB 2.0 Ethernet interfaces. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The obsolete `static_branch()` interface has been removed in favor of `static_key_true()` and `static_key_false()`. Some information on this interface can be found in [this article](/Articles/484527/). 

  * Some initial work has been done to separate the dynamic tick code from the idle task, setting the ground for stopping the timer tick on non-idle CPUs. 

  * The power domains subsystem has seen some integration with the cpuidle code to handle situations where devices share power lines with CPU cores. 

  * The VFS layer has seen some significant changes. There is a new `atomic_open()` inode operation that combines the process of looking up, possibly creating, and opening a file into a single, atomic operation. The whole "open intents" mechanism has been removed. Numerous other operations have had prototype changes. The [deferred `fput()` changes](/Articles/494158/) have been merged, simplifying the process of cleaning up file structures. 

  * The PowerPC architecture now supports the jump label mechanism. 

  * The `NLMSG_NEW()` and `NLMSG_PUT()` macros have been removed from the netlink interface. 

  * The input subsystem has a new interface for the creation of user-space drivers; see [Documentation/hid/uhid.txt](/Articles/508083/) for details. 

  * There is [a new grouping mechanism](/Articles/490284/) for I/O memory management units intended to help enable safe device access to virtualized guests. 




This merge window can be expected to last until sometime around August 4, so there is quite a bit of code that can be expected to find its way into the mainline before the -rc1 release happens. See next week's Kernel Page for coverage of the continuation of the 3.6 merge window.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.6](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.6)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
