# The conclusion of the 3.6 merge window [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 3, 2012 

Linus [closed](/Articles/509556/) the 3.6 merge window on August 2, a couple of days earlier than would have normally been expected. There were evidently two reasons for that: a desire to send a message to those who turn in their pull requests on the last day of the merge window, and his upcoming vacation. In the end, he only pulled a little over 300 changes since [the previous merge window summary](/Articles/508790/), with the result that 8,587 changes were pulled in the 3.6 merge window as a whole. 

Those 300+ changes included the following: 

  * The block I/O bandwidth controller has been reworked so that each control group has its own request list, rather than working from a single, global list. This increases the memory footprint of block I/O control groups, but makes them function in a manner much closer to the original intention when lots of requests are in flight. 

  * A set of [restrictions on the creation of hard and soft links](/Articles/503660/) has been added in an attempt to improve security; they should eliminate a lot of temporary file vulnerabilities. 

  * The device mapper dm-raid module now supports RAID10 (a combination of striping and mirroring). 

  * The list of new hardware support in 3.6 now includes OMAP DMA engines. 

  * The filesystem freeze functionality has been reimplemented to be more robust; in-tree filesystems have been updated to use the new mechanism. 




The process of stabilizing all of those changes now begins; if the usual patterns hold, the final 3.6 kernel can be expected sometime in the second half of September.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.6](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.6)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
