# KS2012: memcg/mm: Proportional I/O controller [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Michael Kerrisk**  
September 17, 2012 

* * *

[2012 Kernel Summit](/Articles/KernelSummit2012/)

During the 2012 Kernel Summit [memcg/mm minisummit](/Articles/516439/), Fengguang Wu initiated a discussion on improving the implementation of the proportional I/O controller. This controller allows the user to assign I/O weights for each cgroup (see the kernel source file [`Documentation/cgroups/blkio-controller.txt`](/Articles/516428/) for some background). The controller works well for direct I/O, since the CFQ (Completely Fair Queuing) I/O scheduler has one sync queue for each blkio cgroup. However, it comes up short when the blkio cgroups also submit buffered writes, because the buffered write I/Os are currently all mixed into one single global CFQ queue. 

The straightforward solution, proposed by Tejun Heo, is to split up the global CFQ queue by cgroup, so that the CFQ scheduler can easily schedule the per-cgroup sync/async queues according to the per-cgroup I/O weights. Unfortunately, the split will lead to smaller I/O sizes and an increase in the number of `PG_writeback` pages present in the async CFQ queue(s) at any one time, hurting I/O performance, system responsiveness, and huge-page allocations. 

Fengguang was not happy with Tejun's proposed solution. Instead, he proposes a "zero-cost" and scalable scheme: 

  1. Keep the one async CFQ queue. 

  2. Support per-cgroup buffered write weights in `balance_dirty_pages()` (BDP). 

  3. Run a user-space daemon that updates the CFQ/BDP weights every second, so that the resulting I/O throughput meets the user-desired per-cgroup I/O weights in the long term. Fengguang noted, however, that this part may be challenging to get right. 




There were relatively few conclusive comments on both proposals, presumably because of the inherent complexities of the problem and the fact that some active figures in this area were not present for the meeting. 

[Next: Shared-memory accounting in memory cgroups](/Articles/516541/)  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Block layer/I/O scheduling](/Kernel/Index#Block_layer-IO_scheduling)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
