# Small-task packing [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 24, 2012 

The Linux scheduler, in its various forms, has always been optimized for the (sometimes conflicting) goals of throughput and interactivity. Balancing those two objectives across all possible workloads has proved to be enough of a challenge over the years; one could argue that the last thing the scheduler developers need is yet another problem to worry about. In recent times, though, that is exactly what has happened: the scheduler is now expected to run the workload while also minimizing power consumption. Whether the system lives in a pocket or in a massive data center, the owner is almost certainly interested in more power-efficient operation. This problem has proved to be difficult to solve, but Vincent Guittot's recently posted [small-task packing patch set](/Articles/518834/) may be a step in the right direction. 

A "small task" in this context is one that uses a relatively small amount of CPU time; in particular, small tasks are runnable less than 25% of the time. Such tasks, if they are spread out across a multi-CPU system, can cause processors to stay awake (and powered up) without actually using those processors to any great extent. Rather than keeping all those CPUs running, it clearly makes sense to coalesce those small tasks onto a smaller number of processors, allowing the remaining processors to be powered down. 

The first step toward this goal is, naturally, to be able to identify those small tasks. That can be a challenge: the scheduler in current kernels does not collect the information needed to make that determination. The good news is that this problem has already been solved by Paul Turner's [per-entity load tracking patch set](/Articles/513135/), which allows for proper tracking of the load added to the system by every "entity" (being either a process or a control group full of processes) in the system. This patch set has been out-of-tree for some time, but the clear plan is to merge it sometime in the near future. 

The kernel's [scheduling domains](/Articles/80911/) mechanism represents the topology of the underlying system; among other things, it is intended to help the scheduler decide when it makes sense to move a process from one CPU to another. Vincent's patch set starts by adding a new flag bit to indicate when two CPUs (or CPU groups, at the higher levels) share the same power line. In the shared case, the two CPUs cannot be powered down independently of each other. So, when two CPUs live in the same [power domain](/Articles/449585/), moving a process from one to the other will not significantly change the system's power consumption. By default, the "shared power line" bit is set for all CPUs; that preserves the scheduler's current behavior. 

The real goal, from the power management point of view, is to vacate all CPUs on a given power line so the whole set can be powered down. So the scheduler clearly wants to use the new information to move small tasks out of CPU power domains. As we have [recently seen](/Articles/518329/), though, process-migration code needs to be written carefully lest it impair the performance of the scheduler as a whole. So, in particular, it is important that the scheduler not have to scan through a (potentially long) list of CPUs when contemplating whether a small task should be moved or not. To that end, Vincent's patch assigns a "buddy" to each CPU at system initialization time. Arguably "buddy" is the wrong term to use, since the relationship is a one-way affair; a CPU can dump small tasks onto its buddy (and only onto the buddy), but said buddy cannot reciprocate. 

Imagine, for a moment, a simple two-socket, four-CPU system that looks (within the constraints of your editor's severely limited artistic capabilities) like this: 

> ![\[System
diagram\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2012/task-packing1.png)

For each CPU, the scheduler tries to find the nearest suitable CPU on a different power line to buddy it with. The most "suitable" CPU is typically the lowest-numbered one in each group, but, on heterogeneous systems, the code will pick the CPU with the lowest power consumption on the assumption that it is the most power-efficient choice. So, if each CPU and each socket in the above system could be powered down independently, the buddy assignments would look like this: 

> ![\[Buddies\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2012/task-packing2.png)

Note that CPU 0 has no buddy, since it is the lowest-numbered processor in the system. If CPUs 2 and 3 shared a power line, the buddy assignments would be a little different: 

> ![\[Buddies\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2012/task-packing3.png)

In each case, the purpose is to define an easy path by which an alternative, power-independent CPU can be chosen as the new home for a small task. 

With that structure in place, the actual changes to the scheduler are quite small. The normal load-balancing code is unaffected for the simple reason that small tasks, since they are more likely than not to be sleeping when the load balancer runs, tend not to be moved in the balancing process. Instead, the scheduler will, whenever a known small task is awakened, consider whether that task should be moved from its current CPU to the buddy CPU. If the buddy is sufficiently idle, the task will be moved; otherwise the normal wakeup logic runs as always. Over time, small tasks will tend to migrate toward the far end of the buddy chain as long as the load on those processors does not get too high. They should, thus, end up "packed" on a relatively small number of power-efficient processors. 

Vincent's patch set included some benchmark results showing that throughput with the modified scheduler is essentially unchanged. Power consumption is a different story, though; using "cyclictest" as a benchmark, he showed power consumption at about ⅓ its previous level. The benefits are sure to be smaller with a real-world workload, but it seems clear that pushing small tasks toward a small number of CPUs can be a good move. Expect discussion of approaches like this one to pick up once the per-entity load tracking patches have found their way into the mainline.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Power management/CPU scheduling](/Kernel/Index#Power_management-CPU_scheduling)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Scheduler/and power management](/Kernel/Index#Scheduler-and_power_management)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
