# A FALLOC_FL_NO_HIDE_STALE followup [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 5, 2012 

Last week's edition included [an article on the addition of the `FALLOC_FL_NO_HIDE_STALE` flag](/Articles/527373/) to the `fallocate()` system call. Some developers, objecting to the patch and the way it got into the kernel, had called for it to be reverted before the 3.7 release went final. At the time, Linus had not made any remarks in the discussion or indicated whether he would accept the revert. 

That situation changed after Linus was [prompted](/Articles/528108/) by Martin Steigerwald. His [response](/Articles/528109/) was clear enough: 

If you want something reverted, you show me the *technical* reason for it. Not the "ooh, I'm so annoyed by how this was done" reason for it. 

And if your little feelings got hurt, get your mommy to tuck you in, don't email me about it. Because I'm not exactly known for my deep emotional understanding and supportive personality, am I? 

There were some technical reasons offered in the discussion, along with the more general process-oriented complaints. But it seems clear that Linus has not found that discussion convincing. So, in the absence of a surprise from somewhere, it seems that the new `fallocate()` flag will remain for the 3.7 release, at which point it will become part of the kernel's user-space ABI.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Code review](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Code_review)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [fallocate()](/Kernel/Index#fallocate)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
