# Supporting variable-sized huge pages [LWN.net]

By
Michael Kerrisk
January 23, 2013
Huge pages
are an optimization
technique designed to increase virtual memory performance. The idea is that
instead of a traditional small virtual memory page size (4 kB on most
architectures), an application can employ (much) larger pages (e.g., 2 MB
or 1 GB on x86-64). For applications that can make full use of larger pages,
huge pages provide a number of performance benefits. First, a single page
fault can fault in a large block of memory. Second, larger page sizes
equate to shallower page tables, since fewer page-table levels are required
to span the same range of virtual addresses; consequently, less time is
required to traverse page table entries when translating virtual addresses
to physical addresses. Finally, and most significantly, since entries for
huge pages in the translation lookaside buffer (TLB) span much greater
address ranges, there is an increased chance that a virtual address already
has a match in one of the limited set of entries currently cached in the
TLB, thus obviating the need to traverse page tables.
Applications can explicitly request the use of huge pages when making
allocations, using either
shmget()
with the
SHM_HUGETLB
flag (since Linux 2.6.0) or
mmap()
with the
MAP_HUGETLB
flag (since Linux 2.6.32). It's worth noting that explicit application
requests are not needed to employ huge pages: the
transparent huge pages
feature merged in Linux
2.6.38 allows applications to gain much of the performance benefit of
huge pages without making any changes to application code. There is,
however, a limitation to these APIs: they provide no way to specify the
size of the huge pages to be used for an allocation.  Instead, the kernel
employs the "default" huge page size.
Some architectures only permit one huge page size; on those
architectures, the default is in fact the only choice.  However, some
modern architectures permit multiple huge page sizes, and where the system
administrator has configured the system to provide huge page pools of
different sizes, applications may want to choose the page size used for
their allocation. For example, this may be useful in a NUMA environment,
where a smaller huge page size may be suitable for mappings that are shared
across CPUs, while a larger page size is used for mappings local to a single
CPU.
A
patch
by Andi Kleen that was accepted
during the 3.8 merge window extends the
shmget()
and
mmap()
system calls to allow the caller to select the size used
for huge page allocations. These system calls have the following
prototypes:
void *mmap(void *addr, size_t length, int prot, int flags,
               int fd, off_t offset);
    int shmget(key_t key, size_t size, int shmflg);
Neither of those calls provides an argument that can be directly used
to specify the desired page size. Therefore, Andi's patch shoehorns the
value into some bits that are currently unused in one of the arguments of
each call—in the
flags
argument for
mmap()
and in the
shmflg
argument for
shmget()
.
In both system calls, the huge page size is encoded in the six bits
from 26 through to 31 (i.e., the bit mask
0xfc000000
).  The value
in those six bits is the base-two log of the desired page size. As a special case, if the value encoded in the bits is
zero, then the kernel selects the default huge page size. This provides
binary backward compatibility for the interfaces. If the
specified page size is not supported by the architecture, then
shmget()
and
mmap()
fail with the error
ENOMEM
.
An
application can manually perform the required base-two log calculation and
bit shift to generate the required bit-mask value, but this is
clumsy. Instead, an architecture can define suitable constants for the huge
page sizes that it supports.  Andi's patch defines two such constants corresponding to the
available page sizes on x86-64:
#define SHM_HUGE_SHIFT  26
    #define SHM_HUGE_MASK   0x3f
    /* Flags are encoded in bits (SHM_HUGE_MASK << SHM_HUGE_SHIFT) */

    #define SHM_HUGE_2MB    (21 << SHM_HUGE_SHIFT)   /* 2 MB huge pages */
    #define SHM_HUGE_1GB    (30 << SHM_HUGE_SHIFT)   /* 1 GB huge pages */
Corresponding
MAP_*
constants are defined for use in
the
mmap()
system call.
Thus, to employ a 2 MB huge page size when calling
shmget()
, one
would write:
shmget(key, size, flags | SHM_HUGETLB | SHM_HUGE_2MB);
That is, of course, the same as this manually calculated version:
shmget(key, size, flags | SHM_HUGETLB | (21 << HUGE_PAGE_SHIFT));
In passing, it's worth noting that an application can determine the
default page size by looking at the
Hugepagesize
entry in
/proc/meminfo
and can, if the kernel was configured with
CONFIG_HUGETLBFS
, discover the available page sizes on the system
by scanning the directory entries under
/sys/kernel/mm/hugepages
.
One concern
raised
by your editor when
reviewing an earlier version of Andi's patch was whether the bit space in
the
mmap()
flags
argument is becoming exhausted. Exactly
how many bits are still unused in that argument turns out to be a little
difficult to determine, because different architectures define the same
flags with different values. For example, the
MAP_HUGETLB
flag has
the values 0x4000, 0x40000, 0x80000, or 0x100000, depending on the
architecture. It turns out that before Andi's patch was applied, there were
only around 11 bits in
flags
that were unused across all
architectures; now that the patch has been applied, just six are left.
The day when the
mmap()
flags
bit space is exhausted
seems to be slowly but steadily approaching. When that happens, either a
new
mmap()
-style API with a 64-bit
flags
argument will be
required, or, as Andi
suggested
, unused
bits in the
prot
argument could be used; the latter option would
be easier to implement, but would also further muddy the interface of an
already complex system call. In any case, concerns about the API design
didn't stop Andrew Morton from accepting the patch, although he was
prompted to
remark
"
I can't say the
userspace interface is a thing of beauty, but I guess we'll live.
"
The new API features will roll out in few weeks' time with the 3.8
release. At that point, application writers will be able to select
different huge page sizes for different memory allocations. However, it
will take a little longer before the
MAP_*
and
SHM_*
page
size constants percolate through to the GNU C library. In the meantime,
programmers who are in a hurry will have to define their own versions of
these constants.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Huge pages
Kernel
Memory management/Huge pages
to post comments