# Some 3.8 development statistics [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
February 13, 2013 

The release of [3.8-rc7](/Articles/537039/) suggests that the 3.8 development cycle is nearing its close. This has been a busy cycle indeed, with, as of this writing, just over 12,300 non-merge changesets finding their way into the mainline. That makes 3.8 the most active development cycle ever, edging out 2.6.25 and its mere 12,243 changesets. Like it or not, the time for the traditional statistics article has come around; this time, though, your editor has tried looking at things in a different way. 

But, before getting to that, here's the usual numbers. As of this writing, some 1,253 developers have contributed code to the 3.8 kernel. The most active of those were: 

> Most active 3.8 developers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> H Hartley Sweeten| 426| 3.5%  
> Bill Pemberton| 381| 3.1%  
> Philipp Reisner| 238| 1.9%  
> Andreas Gruenbacher| 210| 1.7%  
> Lars Ellenberg| 146| 1.2%  
> Mark Brown| 143| 1.2%  
> Sachin Kamat| 135| 1.1%  
> Al Viro| 127| 1.0%  
> Tomi Valkeinen| 115| 0.9%  
> Wei Yongjun| 114| 0.9%  
> Axel Lin| 112| 0.9%  
> Johannes Berg| 104| 0.8%  
> Kevin McKinney| 103| 0.8%  
> YAMANE Toshiaki| 101| 0.8%  
> Ben Skeggs| 100| 0.8%  
> Paulo Zanoni| 100| 0.8%  
> Ian Abbott| 98| 0.8%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 91| 0.7%  
> Andrei Emeltchenko| 84| 0.7%  
> Daniel Vetter| 82| 0.7%  
> | By changed lines  
> ---  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 42448| 5.8%  
> Sreekanth Reddy| 30415| 4.2%  
> H Hartley Sweeten| 22581| 3.1%  
> Naresh Kumar Inna| 19378| 2.7%  
> Larry Finger| 16798| 2.3%  
> Paul Walmsley| 16720| 2.3%  
> Jaegeuk Kim| 13470| 1.9%  
> Rajendra Nayak| 10398| 1.4%  
> David Howells| 9946| 1.4%  
> Wei WANG| 9775| 1.3%  
> Ben Skeggs| 9395| 1.3%  
> Jussi Kivilinna| 8784| 1.2%  
> Philipp Reisner| 8596| 1.2%  
> Eunchul Kim| 8533| 1.2%  
> Bill Pemberton| 8293| 1.1%  
> Nobuhiro Iwamatsu| 7795| 1.1%  
> Peter Hurley| 7671| 1.1%  
> Laxman Dewangan| 6898| 0.9%  
> Lars-Peter Clausen| 6537| 0.9%  
> Lars Ellenberg| 6320| 0.9%  
  
H. Hartley Sweeten's position at the top of the changeset list should be unsurprising by now; he continues the seemingly endless task of cleaning up the Comedi data acquisition drivers. Bill Pemberton has been working to rid the kernel of the `__devinit` markings (and variants), reflecting the fact that we all live in a hotplug world now. Philipp Reisner, Andreas Gruenbacher, and Lars Ellenberg all contributed long lists of changes to the [DRBD](/Articles/329543/) distributed block driver; the resulting code dump caused block maintainer Jens Axboe to [promise](/Articles/537115/) Linus that ""Following that, it was both made perfectly clear that there is going to be no more over-the-wall pulls and how the situation on individual pulls can be improved."" 

On the lines-changed side, Greg Kroah-Hartman worked on the `__devinit` removal, but also removed over 37,000 lines of code from the staging tree. Sreekanth Reddy made a number of additions to the mpt3sas SCSI driver, Naresh Kumar Inna contributed the Chelsio FCoE offload driver, and Larry Finger added the rtl8723ae wireless driver. 

Some 205 employers (that we know about) supported development on the 3.8 kernel. The most active of these were: 

> Most active 3.8 employers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> (None)| 1580| 12.8%  
> Red Hat| 1112| 9.0%  
> Intel| 1076| 8.7%  
> (Unknown)| 917| 7.4%  
> LINBIT| 595| 4.8%  
> Linaro| 572| 4.6%  
> Texas Instruments| 492| 4.0%  
> Vision Engraving Systems| 426| 3.5%  
> Samsung| 410| 3.3%  
> SUSE| 310| 2.5%  
> IBM| 287| 2.3%  
> Google| 254| 2.1%  
> Broadcom| 190| 1.5%  
> (Consultant)| 171| 1.4%  
> Wolfson Microelectronics| 161| 1.3%  
> Freescale| 129| 1.0%  
> Free Electrons| 128| 1.0%  
> Parallels| 123| 1.0%  
> NVidia| 121| 1.0%  
> NetApp| 121| 1.0%  
> | By lines changed  
> ---  
> (None)| 79954| 11.0%  
> Red Hat| 60515| 8.3%  
> Intel| 46326| 6.4%  
> Linux Foundation| 43190| 5.9%  
> (Unknown)| 41097| 5.7%  
> Samsung| 36596| 5.0%  
> (Consultant)| 33175| 4.6%  
> LSI Logic| 30415| 4.2%  
> Linaro| 29030| 4.0%  
> Vision Engraving Systems| 26074| 3.6%  
> LINBIT| 22487| 3.1%  
> Chelsio| 21534| 3.0%  
> Texas Instruments| 21276| 2.9%  
> IBM| 14233| 2.0%  
> Broadcom| 12236| 1.7%  
> Renesas Electronics| 11570| 1.6%  
> NVidia| 10369| 1.4%  
> Realsil Microelectronics| 9797| 1.3%  
> Qualcomm| 9345| 1.3%  
> SUSE| 9139| 1.3%  
  
Red Hat remains in its traditional position at the top of the list — but not by much. Perhaps more significant is that some companies that have long shown up in the top 20 have fallen off the list this time; those companies include AMD and Oracle. Meanwhile, we continue to see an increasingly strong showing from companies in the mobile and embedded area. 

#### What are they working on?

Many of the companies in the above list have obvious objectives for their work in the kernel; LINBIT, for example, is a business built around DRBD, and Wolfson Microelectronics is in the business of selling a lot of audio hardware. But if companies just focused on driver work, there would be nobody left to do the core kernel work; thus, a look at what parts of the kernel any specific company is working on will say something about how broad its objectives are. To that end, your editor set out to hack on the gitdm tool to focus on one company at a time. So, for example, from the 3.3 kernel onward (essentially, from the beginning of 2012 to the present), Red Hat's changes clustered in these areas: 

> Red Hat  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem| Notes  
> 34%| `drivers/`|  9% `gpu`, 6% `media`, 6% `net`, 3% `md`  
> 20%| `fs/`|  3% `xfs`, 3% `nfsd`, 2% `cifs`, 2% `gfs2`, 1% `btrfs`, 1% `ext4`  
> 14%| `include/`|   
> 8%| `net/`|   
> 8%| `tools/`|   
> 7%| `arch/x86/`|   
> 7%| `kernel/`|   
> 2%| `mm/`|   
  
(Patches touching more than one subsystem are counted in each, so the percentages can add up to over 100%.) 

Red Hat puts a lot of effort into making drivers work, but also has a strong interest in the filesystem subtree. The large proportion of patches going into `tools/` reflects Red Hat's continued development of the `perf` tool. 

Intel's focus during the same time period is somewhat different: 

> Intel  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem| Notes  
> 66%| `drivers/`|  22% `net`, 17% `gpu`, 4% `scsi`, 3% `acpi`, 3% `usb`  
> 17%| `net/`|  7% `bluetooth`, 5% `mac80211`, 3% `nfc`  
> 13%| `include/`|   
> 7%| `arch/x86`|   
> 3%| `fs/`|   
  
Intel is a hardware company, so the bulk of its effort is focused on making its products work well in the Linux kernel. Improving memory management or general-purpose filesystems is mostly left for others. 

Google's presence in the kernel development community has grown considerably in the last few years. In this case, the pattern of development is different yet again: 

> Google  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem| Notes  
> 27%| `drivers/`|  4% `net`, 4% `pci`, 3% `staging`, 3% `input`, 3% `gpu`  
> 22%| `net/`|  11% `ipv4`, 5% `core`, 5% `ipv6`  
> 21%| `include/`|   
> 11%| `mm/`|   
> 10%| `fs/`|  6% `ext4`, 1% `proc`  
> 8%| `kernel/`|   
> 6%| `arch/arm`|   
> 5%| `arch/x86`|   
> 4%| `Documentation/`|   
  
Google has an obvious interest in making the Internet work better, and much of its work in the kernel is aimed toward that goal. But the company also wants Android to work better (thus more driver work, ARM architecture work) and better scalability in general, leading to a lot of core kernel work. Much of Google's work is visible to the outside world in one way or another, so it is nice to see that the company has been reasonably diligent about keeping the relevant documentation current. 

While we are on the subject of ARM, what about Linaro? This consortium is very much about hardware enablement, so it would not be surprising to see a focus on the ARM architecture subsystem. And, indeed, that's how it looks: 

> Linaro  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem| Notes  
> 47%| `drivers/`|  5% `pinctrl`, 4% `clk`, 4% `mmc`, 4% `mfd`, 3% `gpu`, 3% `media`  
> 36%| `arch/arm`|   
> 12%| `include/`|   
> 9%| `kernel/`|   
> 6%| `sound/`|   
> 5%| `Documentation/`|   
> 2%| `fs/`|  1.5% `pstore`  
  
Almost everything Linaro does is focused on making the hardware work better; even much of the work on the core kernel is dedicated to timekeeping. And while lots of work in `Documentation/` is always welcome, in this case, it mostly consists of device tree snippets. 

Finally, what about the largest group of all — developers who are working on their own time? Here is where those developers put their energies: 

> Unaffiliated developers  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem| Notes  
> 68%| `drivers/`|  13% `staging`, 12% `net`, 10% `gpu`, 8% `media`, 6% `usb`, 2% `hid`  
> 14%| `arch/`|  5% `arm`, 2% `mips`, 2% `x86`, 2% `sparc`  
> 8%| `include/`|   
> 6%| `net/`|  2% `batman-adv`  
> 3%| `fs/`|   
> 2%| `Documentation/`|   
> 2%| `sound/`|   
> 1%| `kernel/`|   
  
Volunteer developers, it seems, share a strong interest in making their own hardware work; they are also the source of many of the patches going into the staging tree. That suggests that, in a time when much of the kernel is becoming more complex and less approachable, the staging tree is providing a way for new developers to get into the kernel and learn the ropes in a relatively low-pressure setting. The continued health of the community depends on a steady flow of new developers, so providing an easy path for developers to get into kernel development can only be a good thing. 

And, certainly, from the information found here, one should be able to conclude that the development community remains in good health overall. We are about to complete our busiest development cycle ever with no real signs of strain. For the time being, things seem to be functioning quite well.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.8](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.8)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
