# Overlayfs for 3.10 [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 13, 2013 

The "overlayfs" filesystem is one implementation of the [union filesystem](/Articles/324291/) concept, whereby two or more filesystems can be combined into a single, virtual tree. LWN first [reported on](/Articles/403012/) overlayfs in 2010; since then it has seen continued development and has been shipped by a number of distributors. It has not, however, managed to find its way into the mainline kernel. 

In a recent [posting of the overlayfs patch set](/Articles/542551/), developer Miklos Szeredi asked if it could be considered for inclusion in the 3.10 development cycle. He has made such requests before, but, this time, Linus [answered](/Articles/542709/): 

Yes, I think we should just do it. It's in use, it's pretty small, and the other alternatives are worse. Let's just plan on getting this thing done with. 

At Linus's request, Al Viro has [agreed](/Articles/542710/) to review the patches again, though he noted that he has not been entirely happy with them in the past. Unless something serious and unfixable emerges from that review, it looks like overlayfs is finally on track for merging into the mainline kernel.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems/Union](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems-Union)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Overlayfs](/Kernel/Index#Overlayfs)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
