# The 3.11 merge window closes [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 16, 2013 

![\[New logo\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2013/3.11-logo.png) Linus [announced](/Articles/558828/) the release of 3.11-rc1 — and the closing of the 3.11 merge window — on July 14. While the merge window was open, 9,494 non-merge changesets were pulled into the mainline kernel repository. The [last](http://git.kernel.org/linus/ad81f0545ef01ea651886dddac4bef6cec930092) of those changes changed the kernel's codename to "Linux for Workgroups" and modified the boot-time logo; the new version appears to the right. Clearly, Linux development has moved into a new era. 

Of those 9,494 changes, 1,219 were pulled since [last week's summary](/Articles/558126/). User-visible changes in that final batch of patches include: 

  * The new `O_TMPFILE` ABI has changed slightly in response to [concerns](/Articles/558949/) expressed by Linus. In short, `open()` ignores unknown flags, so software using `O_TMPFILE` on older kernels has no way of knowing that it is not, in fact, getting the expected temporary file semantics. Following [a suggestion](/Articles/558951/) from Rasmus Villemoes, Al Viro changed the user-space view of `O_TMPFILE` to include the `O_DIRECTORY` and `O_RDWR` bits — a combination that always results in an error on previous kernels. So applications should always get an error if they attempt to use `O_TMPFILE` on a kernel that does not support that option. 

  * The [zswap](/Articles/537422/) compressed swap cache has been merged into the mainline. The changes to make the memory allocation layer modular, [called for](/Articles/548109/) at this year's Storage, Filesystem, and Memory Management Summit, appear not to have been made, though. 

  * The "blk-throttle" I/O bandwidth controller now properly supports control group hierarchies — but only if the non-default "`sane_behavior`" flag is set. 

  * The "`dm-switch`" device mapper target maps I/O requests to a set of underlying devices. It is intended for situations where the mapping is more complicated than can be expressed with a simple target like "stripe"; see [Documentation/device-mapper/switch.txt](/Articles/558947/) for more information. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **Systems and processors** : ARM System I/O memory management units (hopefully pointing to an era where ARM processors ship with a standard IOMMU) and Broadcom BCM3368 Cable Modem SoCs. 

    * **InfiniBand** : Mellanox Connect-IB PCI Express host channel adapters. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : Intel's "Rapid Start Technology" suspend-to-disk mechanism and Intel x86 package thermal sensors (see [Documentation/thermal/x86_pkg_temperature_thermal](/Articles/558945/) for more information). 

    * **Video4Linux** : OKI Semiconductor ML86V7667 video decoders, Texas Instruments THS8200 video encoders, and Fushicai USBTV007-based video capture devices. 

    * **Watchdog** : Broadcom BCM2835 hardware watchdogs and MEN A21 VME CPU carrier board watchdog timers. 

    * **Staging graduations** : TI OMAP thermal management subsystems. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * Module loading behavior has been changed slightly in that the load will no longer fail in the presence of unknown module parameters. Instead, such parameters will be ignored after the issuing of a log message. This change allows system configurations to continue working after a module parameter is removed or when an older kernel is booted. 

  * The MIPS architecture now supports building with `-fstack-protector` buffer overflow detection. 




Recent development cycles have lasted for about 70 days (though 3.10, at 63 days, was significantly shorter). If that pattern holds for this cycle, the 3.11 kernel can be expected around September 9.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.11](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.11)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
