# Pondering 2038 [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 14, 2013 

Many LWN readers have been in the field long enough to remember the year-2000 problem, caused by widespread use of two decimal digits to store the year. Said problem was certainly overhyped, but the frantic effort to fix it was also not entirely wasted; plenty of systems would, indeed, have misbehaved had all those COBOL programmers not come out of retirement to fix things up. Part of the problem was that the owners of the affected systems waited until almost too late to address the issue, despite the fact that it was highly predictable and had been well understood decades ahead of time. One would hope that, in the free software world, we would not repeat this history with another, equally predictable problem. 

We'll have the opportunity to find out, since one such problem lurks over the horizon. The classic Unix representation for time is a signed 32-bit integer containing the number of seconds since January 1, 1970. This value will overflow on January 19, 2038, less than 25 years from now. One might think that the time remaining is enough to approach a fix in a relaxed manner, and one would be right. But, given the longevity of many installed systems, including hard-to-update embedded systems, there may be less time for a truly relaxed fix than one might think. 

It is thus interesting to note that, on August 12, OpenBSD developer Philip Guenther [checked in a patch](/Articles/563287/) to the OpenBSD system changing the types of most time values to 64-bit quantities. With 64 bits, there is more than enough room to store time values far past the foreseeable future, even if high-resolution (nanosecond-based) time values are used. Once the issues are shaken out, OpenBSD will likely have left the year-2038 problem behind; one could thus argue that they are well ahead of Linux on this score. And perhaps that is true, but there are some good reasons for Linux to proceed relatively slowly with regard to this problem. 

The OpenBSD patch changes types like `time_t` and `clock_t` to 64-bit quantities. Such changes ripple outward quickly; for example, standard types like `struct timeval` and `struct timespec` contain `time_t` fields, so those structures change as well. The `struct stat` passed to the `stat()` system call also contains a set of `time_t` values. In other words, the changes made by OpenBSD add up to one huge, incompatible ABI change. As a result, OpenBSD kernels with this change will generally not run binaries that predate the change; anybody updating to the new code is advised to do so with a great deal of care. 

OpenBSD can do this because it is a self-contained system, with the kernel and user space built together out of a single repository. There is little concern for users with outside binaries; one is expected to update the system as a whole and rebuild programs from source if need be. As a result, OpenBSD developers are much less reluctant to break the kernel ABI than Linux developers are. Indeed, Philip went ahead and expanded `ino_t` (used to represent inode numbers) as well while he was at it, even though that type is not affected by this problem. As long as users testing this code follow the recommendations and start fresh with a full snapshot, everything will still work. Users attempting to update an installed system will need to be a bit more careful. 

In the Linux world, we are unable to simply drag all of user space forward with the kernel, so we cannot make incompatible ABI changes in this way. That is going to complicate the year-2038 transition considerably — all the more reason why it needs to be thought out ahead of time. That said, not all systems are at risk. As a general rule, users of 64-bit systems will not have problems in 2038, since 64-bit values are already the norm on such machines. The 32-bit [x32 ABI](/Articles/456731/) was also designed with 64-bit time values. So many Linux users are already well taken care of. 

But users of the pure 32-bit ABI will run into trouble. Of course, there is a possibility that there will be no 32-bit systems in the wild 25 years from now, but history argues otherwise. Even with its memory addressing limitations (a 32-bit processor with the physical address extension feature will struggle to work with 16GB of memory which, one assumes, will barely be enough to hold a "hello world" program in 2038), a 32-bit system can perform a lot of useful tasks. There may well be large numbers of embedded 32-bit systems running in 2038 that were deployed many years prior. There will almost certainly be 32-bit systems running in 2038 that will need to be made to work properly. 

During a brief discussion on the topic last June, Thomas Gleixner [described](/Articles/563289/) a possible approach to the problem: 

If we really want to survive 2038, then we need to get rid of the timespec based representation of time in the kernel altogether and switch all related code over to a scalar nsec 64bit storage. [...] 

Though even if we fix that we still need to twist our brains around the timespec/timeval based user space interfaces. That's going to be the way more interesting challenge. 

In other words, if a new ABI needs to be created anyway, it would make sense to get rid of structures like `timespec` (which split times into two fields, representing seconds and nanoseconds) and use a simple nanosecond count. Software could then migrate over to the new system calls at leisure. Thomas [suggested](/Articles/563291/) keeping the older system call infrastructure in place for five years, meaning that operations using the older time formats would continue to be directly implemented by the kernel; that would prevent unconverted code from suffering performance regressions. After that period passed, the compatibility code would be replaced by wrappers around the new system calls, possibly slowing the emulated calls down and providing an incentive for developers to update their code. Then, after about ten years, the old system calls could be deprecated. 

Removal of those system calls could be an interesting challenge, though; even Thomas suggested keeping them for 100 years to avoid making Linus grumpy. If the system calls are to be kept up to (and past) 2038, some way will need to be found to make them work in some fashion. John Stultz had [an interesting suggestion](/Articles/563292/) toward that end: turn `time_t` into an unsigned value, sacrificing the ability to represent dates before 1970 to gain some breathing room in the future. There are some interesting challenges to deal with, and some software would surely break, but, without a change, _all_ software using 32-bit `time_t` values will break in 2038. So this change may well be worth considering. 

Even without legacy applications to worry about, making 32-bit Linux year-2038 safe would be a significant challenge. The ABI constraints make the job harder yet. Given that some parts of any migration simply cannot be rushed, and given that some deployed systems run for many years, it would make sense to be thinking about a solution to this problem now. Then, perhaps, we'll all be able to enjoy our retirement without having to respond to a long-predicted `time_t` mess.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Timekeeping](/Kernel/Index#Timekeeping)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Year 2038 problem](/Kernel/Index#Year_2038_problem)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
