# Exchanging two files [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 2, 2013 

The [`renameat()` system call](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/renameat.2.html) changes the name of the file given as an argument, possibly replacing an existing file in the process. This operation is atomic; the view of the filesystem from user space will reflect the situation before or after the `renameat()` call, but it will never expose an intermediate state. Things work well when one file is involved, but what happens when multiple rename operations need to be run as a single atomic operation? That is a big problem, but, thanks to a patch from Miklos Szeredi, we might have a solution to a smaller subset. 

The problem Miklos is trying to solve is the problem of exchanging two files — both files continue to exist, but their names have been swapped. To achieve this, he has posted [a patch set](/Articles/569028/) adding a new `renameat2()` system call: 
    
    
        int renameat2(int olddir, const char *oldname, 
    		  int newdir, const char *newname, unsigned int flags);
    

This system call differs from `renameat()` in that it has the new `flags` argument; if `flags` is zero, `renameat2()` behaves exactly as `renameat()`. If, instead, `flags` contains `RENAME_EXCHANGE`, an existing file at `newname` will not be deleted; instead, it will be renamed to `oldname`. Thus, with this flag, `renameat2()` can be used to atomically exchange two files. The main use case for `renameat2()` is to support union filesystems, where it is often desirable to atomically replace files or directories with "whiteouts" indicating that they have been deleted. One could imagine other possibilities as well; Miklos suggests atomically replacing a directory with a symbolic link as one of them. 

No review comments have been posted as of this writing.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [renameat2()](/Kernel/Index#renameat2)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
