# Understanding the Jailhouse hypervisor, part 2 [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

January 7, 2014

This article was contributed by Valentine Sinitsyn

In the [first part of this series](/Articles/578295/), we discussed what Jailhouse is, had a look at its data structures, covered how it is enabled, and what it does to initialize CPUs. This part concludes the series with a look at how Jailhouse handles interrupts, what is done to create a cell, and how the hypervisor is disabled. 

#### Handling interrupts

Modern x86 processors are equipped with a "local advanced programmable interrupt controller" (LAPIC) that handles delivery of inter-processor interrupts (IPIs) as well as external interrupts that the I/O APIC, which is part of the system's chipset, generates. Currently, Jailhouse virtualizes the LAPIC only; the I/O APIC is simply mapped into the Linux cell, which is not quite safe because a malicious guest (or Linux kernel module) could reprogram it to tamper with other guests' work. 

The LAPIC works in one of two modes: "xAPIC" or "x2APIC". The xAPIC mode is programmed via memory mapped I/O (MMIO), while the x2APIC uses model-specific registers (MSRs). x2APIC mode is backward-compatible with xAPIC, and its MSR addresses directly map to offsets in the MMIO page. When Jailhouse's `apic_init()` function initializes the LAPIC, it checks to see if x2APIC mode is enabled and sets up its `apic_ops` access methods appropriately. Internally, Jailhouse refers to all APIC registers by their MSR addresses. For xAPIC, these values are transparently converted to the corresponding MMIO offsets (see the `read_xapic()` and `write_xapic()` functions in [`apic.c`](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/hypervisor/arch/x86/apic.c) as examples). 

Jailhouse virtualizes the LAPIC in both modes, however the mechanism is slightly different. For xAPIC mode, a special LAPIC access page (`apic_access_page[PAGE_SIZE]` defined in [`vmx.c`](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/hypervisor/arch/x86/vmx.c)) is mapped into the guest's physical address space at `XAPIC_BASE` (0xfee00000); this happens in `vmx_cell_init()`. Later, in `vmcs_setup()`, LAPIC virtualization is enabled; this way, every time a guest tries to access the virtual LAPIC MMIO region, a trap back to the hypervisor (a "VM exit") occurs. No data is really read from the virtual LAPIC MMIO page or written to it, so CPUs can share this page. For x2APIC, instead, normal MSR bitmaps are used. By default, Jailhouse traps access to all LAPIC registers; however, if `apic_init()` detects that host LAPIC is in x2APIC mode, the bitmap is changed so that only ICR (interrupt control register) access is trapped. This happens when the master CPU executes `vmx_init()`. 

There is a special case when a guest tries to access a virtual x2APIC on a system where x2APIC is not enabled. In this case, the MSR bitmap remains unmodified. Jailhouse intercepts accesses to all LAPIC registers and passes incoming requests to xAPIC using the `apic_ops` access methods, effectively emulating an x2APIC on top of xAPIC. Since LAPIC registers are referred to in [`apic.c`](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/hypervisor/arch/x86/apic.c) by their MSR addresses regardless the mode, this emulation has very little overhead. 

The main reason behind Jailhouse's trapping of ICR (and few other registers) access is isolation: a cell shouldn't be able to send an IPI to a CPU that is not in its own CPU set, and the ICR is what defines an interrupt's destination. To achieve this isolation, `apic_cpu_init()` is called by the master CPU during initialization; it stores the mapping from the `apic_id` to the associated `cpu_id` in an array called, appropriately, `apic_to_cpu_id`. When a CPU is assigned a logical LAPIC ID, Jailhouse ensures that it is equal to `cpu_id`. This way, when an IPI is sent to a physical or logical destination, the hypervisor is able to map it to `cpu_id` and check if the CPU is in the cell's set. See `apic_deliver_ipi()` for details. 

Now let's turn to interrupt handling. In `vmcs_setup()`, Jailhouse does not enable traps to the hypervisor on external interrupts and sets the exception bitmaps to all zeroes. This means that the only interrupt that results in a VM exit is a non-maskable interrupt (NMI); everything else is dispatched through the guest's IDT and handled in guest mode. Since cells assert full control over their own resources, this makes sense. 

Currently, NMIs can only come from the hypervisor itself, which uses them to control guest CPUs (`arch_suspend_cpu()` in `apic.c` is an example). When an NMI occurs in a guest, that guest exits VM mode and Jailhouse re-throws the NMI in host mode. The CPU dispatches it through the host IDT and jumps to `apic_nmi_handler()`. It schedules another VM exit using a virtual machines extensions (VMX) feature known as a "preemption timer." `vmcs_setup()` sets this timer to zero, so, if it is enabled, a VM exit occurs immediately after VM entry. The reason behind this indirection is serialization: this way, NMIs (which are asynchronous by nature) are always delivered after entry into the guest system and cannot interfere with the host-to-guest transition. 

Jailhouse runs with interrupts disabled so no interrupt other than an NMI can occur. Any exception in host mode is considered to be a serious fault and results in panic. 

#### Creating a cell

To create a new cell, Jailhouse needs to "shrink" the Linux cell by moving hardware resources to the new cell. It also obviously needs to load the guest image and perform a CPU reset to jump to the guest's entry point. This process starts in the Linux cell with the `JAILHOUSE_CELL_CREATE` `ioctl()` command, leading to a `jailhouse_cell_create()` function call in the kernel. This function copies the cell configuration and guest image from user space (the `jailhouse` user-space tool reads these from files and stores them in memory). Then, the cell's physical memory region is mapped and the guest image is moved to the target (physical) address specified by the user. 

After that, `jailhouse_cell_create()` calls the standard Linux `cpu_down()` function to offline each CPU assigned to the new cell; this is required so that the kernel won't try to schedule processes on those CPUs. Finally, the loader issues a hypercall (`JAILHOUSE_HC_CELL_CREATE`) using the `VMCALL` instruction and passes a pointer to a `struct jailhouse_cell_desc` that describes the new cell. This causes a VM exit from the Linux cell to the hypervisor; `vmx_handle_exit()` dispatches the call to the `cell_create()` function defined in [`hypervisor/control.c`](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/hypervisor/control.c). In turn, `cell_create()` suspends all CPUs assigned to the cell except the one executing the function (if it is in the cell's CPU set) to prevent races. This is done in `cell_suspend()`, which indirectly signals an NMI (as described above) to each CPU and waits for the `cpu_stopped` flag to be set on the target's `cpu_data`. Then, the cell configuration is mapped from the Linux cell to a per-CPU region above `FOREIGN_MAPPING_BASE` in the host's virtual address space (the loader copies this structure into kernel space). 

Memory regions are checked as with the Linux cell, and the new cell is allocated and initialized. After that, the Linux cell is shrunk: all of the new cell's CPUs are removed from the Linux cell's CPU set, the Linux cell's mappings for the guest's physical addresses are destroyed, and the new cell's I/O resources have their bits set in the Linux cell's `io_bitmap`, so accessing them will result in VM exit (and panic). Finally, the new cell is added to the list of cells (which is a singly linked list having `linux_cell` as its head) and each CPU in the cell is reset using `arch_cpu_reset()`. 

On the next VM entry, the CPU will start executing code located at 0x000ffff0 in real mode. If one is running `apic-demo` according to the instructions in the [README file](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/README), this is where `apic-demo.bin`'s 16-bit entry point is. The address 0x000ffff0 is different from the normal x86 reset vector (0xfffffff0), and there is a reason: Jailhouse is not designed to run unmodified guests and has no BIOS emulation, so it can simplify the boot process and skip much of the work required for a real reset vector to work. 

#### Cell initialization and destruction

Cells are represented by `struct cell`, defined in [`x86/include/asm/cell.h`](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/hypervisor/arch/x86/include/asm/cell.h). This structure contains the page table directories for use with the VMX and VT-d virtualization extensions, the `io_bitmap` for VMX, `cpu_set`, and other fields. It is initialized as follows. First, `cell_init()` copies a name for the cell from a descriptor and allocates `cpu_data->cpu_set` if needed (sets less than 64 CPUs in size are stored within `struct cell` in the `small_cpu_set` field). Then, `arch_cell_create()`, the same function that shrinks the Linux cell, calls `vmx_cell_init()` for the new cell; it allocates VMX and VT-d resources (page directories and I/O bitmap), creates EPT mappings for the guest's physical address ranges (as per `struct jailhouse_cell_desc`), maps the LAPIC access page described above, and copies the I/O bitmap to `struct cell` from the cell descriptor (`struct jailhouse_cell_desc`). For the Linux cell, the master CPU calls this function during system-wide initialization. 

When the Linux cell is shrunk, `jailhouse_cell_create()` has already put the detached CPUs offline. Linux never uses guest memory pages since they are taken from the region reserved at boot as described in part 1. However, Jailhouse currently takes no action to detach I/O resources or devices in general. If they were attached to the Linux cell, they will remain attached, and it may cause a panic if a Linux driver tries to use an I/O port that has been moved to another cell. To prevent this, you should not assign these resources to the Linux cell. 

As of this writing, Jailhouse has no support for cell destruction. However this feature has recently appeared in the development branch and will likely be available soon. When a cell is destroyed, its CPUs and memory pages are reassigned back to the Linux cell, and other resources are also returned to where they originated from. 

#### Disabling Jailhouse

To disable Jailhouse, the user-space tool issues the `JAILHOUSE_DISABLE` `ioctl()` command, causing a call to `jailhouse_disable()`. This function calls `leave_hypervisor()` (found in [`main.c`](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse/blob/master/main.c)) on each CPU in the Linux cell and waits for these calls to complete. Then the `hypervisor_mem mapping` created in `jailhouse_enable()` is destroyed, the function brings up all offlined CPUs (which were presumably moved to other cells), and exits. From this point, Linux kernel will be running on bare metal again. 

The `leave_hypervisor()` call issues a `JAILHOUSE_HC_DISABLE` hypercall, causing a VM exit at the given CPU, after which `vmx_handle_exit()` calls `shutdown()`. For the first Linux CPU that called it, this function iterates over CPUs in all cells other than Linux cell and calls `arch_shutdown_cpu()` for each of these CPUs. A call to `arch_shutdown_cpu()` is equivalent to suspending the CPU, setting `cpu_data->shutdown_cpu` to true, then resuming the CPU. As described above, this sequence transfers the control to `apic_handle_events()`, but this time this function detects that the CPU is shutting down. It disables the LAPIC and effectively executes a `VMXOFF; HLT` sequence to disable VMX on the CPU and halt it. This way, the hypervisor is disabled on all CPUs outside of the Linux cell. 

When `shutdown()` returns, VT-d is disabled and the hypervisor restores the Linux environment for the CPU. First, the `cpu_data->linux_*` fields are copied from VMCS guest area. Then, `arch_cpu_restore()` is called to disable VMX (without halting the CPU this time) and restore various register values from `cpu_data->linux_*`. Afterward, the general-purpose registers are popped from the hypervisor stack, the Linux stack is restored, the RAX register is zeroed and a `RET` instruction is issued. For the Linux kernel, everything will look like `leave_hypervisor()` has returned successfully; this happens to each CPU in the Linux cell. After that, any offlined CPUs (likely halted by `arch_shutdown_cpu()`) are brought back to the active state, as described earlier. 

#### Conclusion

Jailhouse is a young project that is developing quickly. It is a lightweight system that does not intend to replace full-featured hypervisors like Xen or KVM, but this doesn't mean that Jailhouse itself is feature-limited. It is rare project that has a potential both in a classroom and in production, and we hope this article helped you to understand it better.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Jailhouse](/Kernel/Index#Jailhouse)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Virtualization/Jailhouse](/Kernel/Index#Virtualization-Jailhouse)  
[GuestArticles](/Archives/GuestIndex/)| [Sinitsyn, Valentine](/Archives/GuestIndex/#Sinitsyn_Valentine)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
