# Some 3.13 development statistics [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 8, 2014 

As of this writing, the current development kernel snapshot is [3.13-rc6](/Articles/578197/). Linus has said that this cycle will almost certainly go to -rc8, even if things look stable (as they indeed do) to avoid opening the merge window while he is attending linux.conf.au. Your editor, wishing to avoid writing highly technical articles during that period for exactly the same reason, deems this the right time for our traditional, non-technical look at the 3.13 development cycle and where the patches came from this time around. 

There have been just under 12,000 non-merge changesets pulled into the mainline kernel for 3.13 so far; the total will almost certainly exceed 12,000 by the time the final release happens. 3.13 is thus a significantly busier cycle than its immediate predecessors; indeed, only three previous cycles (2.6.25, 3.8, and 3.10) have brought in more changes. Those changes, which added 446,000 lines and deleted 241,000 for a net growth of 205,000 lines, were contributed by 1,339 developers. The most active of those developers were: 

> Most active 3.13 developers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> Sachin Kamat| 361| 3.0%  
> Jingoo Han| 323| 2.7%  
> Marcel Holtmann| 225| 1.9%  
> Viresh Kumar| 169| 1.4%  
> Lars-Peter Clausen| 150| 1.3%  
> H Hartley Sweeten| 147| 1.2%  
> Ville Syrjälä| 145| 1.2%  
> Joe Perches| 135| 1.1%  
> Mark Brown| 122| 1.0%  
> Takashi Iwai| 120| 1.0%  
> Lee Jones| 113| 0.9%  
> Linus Walleij| 103| 0.9%  
> Peter Zijlstra| 92| 0.8%  
> Wei Yongjun| 88| 0.7%  
> Ben Widawsky| 88| 0.7%  
> Al Viro| 87| 0.7%  
> Ian Abbott| 85| 0.7%  
> Russell King| 83| 0.7%  
> Thierry Reding| 80| 0.7%  
> Ingo Molnar| 76| 0.6%  
> | By changed lines  
> ---  
> Ben Skeggs| 19014| 3.5%  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 17378| 3.2%  
> Jovi Zhangwei| 16377| 3.0%  
> Guenter Roeck| 13013| 2.4%  
> Eugene Krasnikov| 10082| 1.8%  
> Patrick McHardy| 8863| 1.6%  
> Joe Perches| 7076| 1.3%  
> Ralf Baechle| 6687| 1.2%  
> Archit Taneja| 6246| 1.1%  
> Akhil Bhansali| 6214| 1.1%  
> Aaro Koskinen| 6164| 1.1%  
> Ard Biesheuvel| 5814| 1.1%  
> Dave Chinner| 5311| 1.0%  
> David Howells| 5287| 1.0%  
> Russell King| 5125| 0.9%  
> Hisashi Nakamura| 4605| 0.8%  
> Ian Abbott| 4452| 0.8%  
> Kent Overstreet| 4349| 0.8%  
> Thierry Escande| 4236| 0.8%  
> Jens Axboe| 3745| 0.7%  
  
Sachin Kamat's and Jongoo Han's extensive janitorial work throughout the driver subsystem put them in the top two positions for changesets merged for the second cycle in a row. Marcel Holtmann did extensive surgery in the Bluetooth layer, Viresh Kumar did a lot of cleanup work in the cpufreq subsystem, and Lars-Peter Clausen did a lot of development in the driver tree, focusing especially on industrial I/O and audio drivers. 

In the "lines changed" column, Ben Skeggs's work is concentrated, as always, on the nouveau driver. Greg Kroah-Hartman and Jovi Zhangwei do not properly belong on the list this month; they show up as a result of the [addition of ktap to the staging tree](/Articles/572788/) (by Jovi) and its subsequent removal (by Greg). Guenter Roeck removed support for the Renesas H8/300 architecture, and Eugene Krasnikov contributed a single patch adding a driver for Qualcomm WCN3660/WCN3680 wireless adapters. Patrick McHardy's #6 position, resulting from the addition of the nftables subsystem, also merits a mention. 

A minimum of 217 companies supported work on the 3.13 kernel; the most active of those were: 

> Most active 3.13 employers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> Intel| 1428| 11.9%  
> (None)| 1323| 11.1%  
> Linaro| 1166| 9.7%  
> Red Hat| 1082| 9.0%  
> Samsung| 594| 5.0%  
> (Unknown)| 570| 4.8%  
> IBM| 419| 3.5%  
> (Consultant)| 342| 2.9%  
> SUSE| 328| 2.7%  
> Texas Instruments| 263| 2.2%  
> Outreach Program for Women| 218| 1.8%  
> Freescale| 206| 1.7%  
> Google| 198| 1.7%  
> NVidia| 180| 1.5%  
> Vision Engraving Systems| 147| 1.2%  
> Oracle| 135| 1.1%  
> Renesas Electronics| 123| 1.0%  
> Free Electrons| 121| 1.0%  
> Huawei Technologies| 119| 1.0%  
> ARM| 111| 0.9%  
> | By lines changed  
> ---  
> Red Hat| 63583| 11.7%  
> Intel| 59780| 11.0%  
> (None)| 51458| ~~9.4%~~ 11.0%  
> Linaro| 32054| 5.9%  
> (Unknown)| 26712| 4.9%  
> Texas Instruments| 20219| 3.7%  
> Linux Foundation| 18262| 3.4%  
> Huawei Technologies| 18182| 3.3%  
> IBM| 15435| 2.8%  
> (Consultant)| 14802| 2.7%  
> Samsung| 14739| 2.7%  
> Ericsson| 13722| 2.5%  
> NVidia| 10884| 2.0%  
> ~~Astaro~~| ~~8863~~| ~~1.6%~~  
> Wind River| 8421| 1.5%  
> Renesas Electronics| 7337| 1.3%  
> SUSE| 7230| 1.3%  
> Fusion-IO| 6956| 1.3%  
> Western Digital| 6590| 1.2%  
> Nokia| 6479| 1.2%  
  
The percentage of contributions from volunteers is up a bit this time around, but not by enough to suggest any real change in its long-term decline. Perhaps the biggest surprise here, though, is that, for the first time, Red Hat has been pushed down in the "by changesets" column by Linaro. If there was ever any doubt that the mobile and embedded industries are playing an ever larger role in the development of the kernel, this should help to dispel them. That said, if one looks at the employers of the subsystem maintainers who merged these patches, the picture looks a bit different: 

> Employers with the most non-author signoffs  
> ---  
> Red Hat| 2115| 19.2%  
> Intel| 1704| 15.5%  
> Linux Foundation| 1282| 11.6%  
> Linaro| 912| 8.3%  
> Google| 553| 5.0%  
> Samsung| 464| 4.2%  
> (None)| 403| 3.7%  
> Texas Instruments| 350| 3.2%  
> Novell| 348| 3.2%  
> IBM| 289| 2.6%  
  
The situation is changing here, with the mobile/embedded sector having a bigger presence than it did even one year ago, but, for the most part, entry into subsystem trees is still controlled by developers working for a relatively small number of mostly enterprise-oriented companies. 

Finally, it can be interesting to look at first-time contributors — developers whose first patch ever went into 3.13. There were 219 of these first-time contributors in this development cycle. Your editor decided to look at the very first patch from each first-time contributor and see which files were touched. These changes are spread out throughout the kernel tree, but the most common places for first-time contributors to make their first changes in 3.13 were: 

> Directory| Contributors  
> ---|---  
> `drivers/staging`| 24  
> `drivers/net`| 21  
> `include`| 21  
> `net`| 19  
> `arch/arm`| 14  
> `drivers/gpu`| 10  
> `arch/powerpc`| 10  
> `arch/x86`| 7  
> `drivers/media`| 7  
> `Documentation`| 7  
  
One of the justifications behind the staging tree was that it would serve as an entry point for new developers; these numbers suggest that it is working. That said, if one looks at longer periods, more new contributors work in `drivers/net` than anywhere else. 

Another interesting question is: what is the employment situation for first-time contributors to the kernel? Are new kernel hackers still volunteers, or do they have jobs already? The numbers are hazy, but there are still some conclusions that can be drawn: 

> Employer| Count  
> ---|---  
> (Unknown)| 97  
> Intel | 21   
> Huawei Technologies | 6   
> Samsung | 6   
> Linaro | 5   
> (None) | 4   
> AMD | 3   
> Texas Instruments | 3  
> Outreach Program for Women| 3  
  
Another way to put this information is that 118 of the first-time contributors in 3.13 were working for companies, 97 of them were unknown, and four were known to be volunteers. Many (but not all) of the unknowns will eventually turn out to have been working on their own time. But, even if every single one of them were a volunteer, we would still have more first-time contributors coming from companies than working on their own. In a time when experienced kernel developers can be hard to hire, companies will have little choice but to grow their own; some companies, clearly, are working to do just that. 

And that, in turn, suggests that the long-term decline in volunteer contributions may not be a big problem in the end. Getting code into the kernel remains a good way to get a job, but, it seems, quite a few developers are successful at getting the job first, and contributing afterward. With luck, that will help us to continue to have a stream of new developers coming into the kernel development community.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.13](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.13)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
