# 3.17 merge window, part 2 [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 13, 2014 

As of this writing, Linus has pulled 9,894 non-merge changesets into the kernel repository for the 3.17 development cycle; that is 3,750 since [last week's merge window summary](/Articles/607627/) was written. The pace has fallen off in recent days; Linus is evidently traveling and will eventually arrive at the 2014 Kernel Summit, which begins on August 18. 

Some of the more interesting user-visible changes merged since last week include: 

  * The [memfd and file sealing](/Articles/593918/) patches have been merged. A "memfd" is a region of memory identified by a file descriptor that may be passed between processes. File sealing allows a process to freeze the contents of a memfd, disallowing any further changes. Together, these features are meant to be a key part of the upcoming [kdbus](/Articles/580194/) subsystem. 

  * The new [`kexec_file_load()`](/Articles/603116/) system call is available. It allows the kernel to perform signature checking on a new kernel before booting into it. That, in turn, should allow nervous distributors to enable the kexec functionality on systems running in a UEFI secure boot environment. 

  * Initial [multiqueue](/Articles/552904/) support has been added to the SCSI subsystem. Multiqueue operation should provide increased performance and scalability. This code is experimental in this release and off by default; the `use_blk_mq` module parameter must be provided to turn it on. 

  * KVM virtualization now works on big-endian ARM systems. 

  * DRM "[render nodes](https://dvdhrm.wordpress.com/2013/09/01/splitting-drm-and-kms-device-nodes/)," which provide access to the rendering hardware in graphics processors independently of the display, are now enabled by default. 

  * Support for the old POWER3 and rs64 architectures has been removed from the kernel. These architectures have evidently been broken for a number of releases and nobody noticed. Support for Samsung S5P6440, S5P6450, and S5PC100 systems has also been removed. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **Processors and systems** : Mediatek MT6589 systems-on-chip (SoCs), Broadcom BCM7XXX-based boards, and Hisilicon HiX5HD2 SoCs. 

    * **Audio** : Cirrus Logic CS4265 codecs, Realtek ALC286 and ALC5670 codecs, Freescale asynchronous sample rate converters, Intel Broadwell Wildcatpoint audio DSPs, Hardkernel Odroid-X2 and Odroid-U3 audio controllers, SiRF SoC USP interfaces, and Texas Instruments TAS2552 mono audio amplifiers. 

    * **Graphics** : STMicroelectronics SoC stiH41x chipsets and Cirrus Logic CLPS711X framebuffers. 

    * **Input** : Microchip CAP1106 six-channel capacitive touch sensors and Wacom protocol 4 serial tablets. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : HP iPAQ Atmel Micro ASIC battery controllers, Intel Crystal Cove power management ICs, Maxim MAX77802 power management ICs, Freescale i.MX1 pin controllers, Qualcomm 8960 pin controllers, MSI GT68xR LED controllers, NVIDIA Tegra XUSB pad controllers, NXP PCF85063 real-time clocks, and Xilinx Zynq GPIO controllers. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The ALSA sound driver core is now able to work with hardware setups where multiple codecs are attached to a single digital audio interface. 



By normal standards, the 3.17 merge window would be expected to close on August 17. Linus has suggested that, in compensation for the time when he is traveling, the window may stay open for a bit longer, allowing him to complete the merging process during the slower moments at the Kernel Summit. Regardless of how that turns out, next week's Kernel Page will include a summary of the final patches merged for this development cycle.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.17](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.17)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
