# 3.17 Merge window, part 3 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 20, 2014 

Linus [released](/Articles/608779/) 3.17-rc1 and closed the merge window for the 3.17 release on August 16. He had suggested that the merge window could be extended, but that's not how things turned out. Only a small number of changes made it into the mainline repository after [last week's summary](/Articles/608434/) was written. User-visible changes merged in this time include: 

  * The xfs filesystem now requires a kernel built with 64-bit sector numbers. There is also a sysfs directory for xfs now with [a small number of parameters](/Articles/608751/) mostly of use for filesystem testing. 

  * The NFS client now supports RCU-based lookups, speeding the task of looking up files when the information is available in cache. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : STi thermal controllers, Allwinner A31 DMA controllers, Renesas Type-AXI NBPF DMA controllers, and TI DRA7xx PCIe controllers. 

    * **Networking** : APM X-Gene SoC-based Ethernet controllers. 




In the end, 10,890 non-merge changesets found their way into the mainline repository during the 3.17 merge window. This cycle has now entered the stabilization phase; the final 3.17 release can be expected, if all goes well, sometime in early October.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.17](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.17)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
