# Foo over UDP [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 1, 2014 

Tunneling protocols are increasingly important in modern networking setups. By tying distant networks together, they enable the creation of virtual private networks, access to otherwise-firewalled ports, and more. Tunneling can happen at multiple levels in the networking stack; SSH tunnels are implemented over TCP, while protocols like [GRE](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generic_Routing_Encapsulation) and [IPIP](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IP_in_IP) work directly at the IP level. Increasingly, though, there is interest in implementing tunneling inside the UDP protocol. The "foo over UDP" (FOU) patch set from Tom Herbert, which has been pulled into the net-next tree for 3.18, implements UDP-level tunneling in a generic manner. 

Why UDP? Just about any network interface out there has hardware support for UDP at this point, handling details like checksumming. UDP adds just enough information (port numbers, in particular) to make the routing of encapsulated packets easy. UDP can also be made to work with protocols like Receive Side Scaling (RSS) and the Equal-cost multipath routing protocol (ECMP) to improve performance in highly connected settings. The advantages of UDP tunneling are enough that some developers think it's going to become nearly ubiquitous in the coming years. 

Packet encapsulation and tunneling over UDP is a relatively straightforward concept to understand. Suppose a simple TCP packet is presented to the tunneling interface: 

> ![\[TCP packet\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2014/fou.png)

This packet has the usual IP and TCP headers, followed by the data the user wishes to send. The encapsulation process does something like this: 

> ![\[Encapsulated TCP packet\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2014/fou-encap.png)

At this point, the packet looks like a UDP packet that happens to have a TCP packet buried within it. The system can now transmit it to the destination as an ordinary UDP packet; at the receiving end, the extra headers will be stripped off and the original packet will be fed into the network stack. 

Configuring a FOU tunnel will typically be a two-step process. The transmit and receive sides have been separated, a feature which, among other things, allows asymmetric setups should anybody want them. On the receive side, configuration is really just a matter of setting up a UDP port to be the recipient of encapsulated packets. The new "`fou`" subcommand is intended for this purpose: 
    
    
        ip fou add port 5555 ipproto 4
    

This command sets aside port 5555, saying that packets arriving there will have protocol 4, which is IP encapsulation. Packets received on that port will have the encapsulation removed; they will then be fed back into the network stack for delivery to the real destination. 

Things are a little more complicated on the transmit side, since the destination address must be provided and transmission needs to work with existing encapsulation protocols. A typical command might look like: 
    
    
        ip link add name tun1 type ipip \
           remote 192.168.1.1 local 192.168.1.2 ttl 225 \
           encap fou encap-sport auto encap-dport 5555
    

This command will set up a new virtual interface (`tun1`) configured for IPIP encapsulation. The source port for packets is left to the network stack to decide, but the destination port will be 5555. Of course, one has to get the encapsulation protocol to actually use this interface. At the moment, support for doing that has been added to the IPIP, [SIT](http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/networking/tunneling#SIT_tunnels) (an IPv4-to-IPv6 tunneling protocol) and GRE (used for virtual private networks) protocols. 

Some numbers posted in [the patch set](/Articles/614433/) show significant performance increases for the SIT and IPIP protocols; performance with GRE was roughly equivalent to the no-FOU case. So this feature has a clear potential to speed things up by taking advantage of existing optimizations around UDP transmission and receipt. The nice thing is that no special hardware support is required; current hardware can handle UDP just fine. So it is a simple solution that will work on existing systems — and it should be available in the 3.18 kernel release.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Networking](/Kernel/Index#Networking)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
