# Page faults in user space: MADV_USERFAULT, remap_anon_range(), and userfaultfd() [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
October 7, 2014
The quest for performance often seems to lead developers to want to move
functionalities out of the kernel and back into user space, where a
dedicated application can, in theory, make things happen more quickly.
Networking functions are often handled in this way, for example.  A desire
to move 
memory-management functions into user space is somewhat less common, but,
as can be seen from Andrea Arcangeli's
user-space page fault handling patch set
, it
is not unheard of.
Page-fault handling usually requires fetching data from secondary storage
and placing it in the correct place in the faulting process's address
space.  Why would one want to do that in user space?  The primary use case
here is 
the live migration of virtual machines running under KVM.  Migration
requires moving the virtual machine's memory, which can take a long time,
but the owner of that machine would like to see as brief an outage as
possible while the migration is happening.  Preferably, the migration would
not be noticeable at all.  One way to approach that goal is to move the
minimal amount of memory needed to represent the virtual machine on the new
host. 
Once the machine starts running in the new location, it will certainly try
to access pages which have not 
yet been moved.  If the (user-space) virtual machine manager can catch the
resulting page faults, it can prioritize the transfer of the pages the
running machine actually needs.  It is, in other words, a form of
cross-host demand paging that makes migration happen with lower latency.
Other uses — shared memory distributed
across the network, for example — are possible as well.
The patch set starts by adding a couple of new variants to the
get_user_pages()
function, which is charged with making user-space
pages accessible to the kernel:
long get_user_pages_locked(struct task_struct *tsk, struct mm_struct *mm,
		               unsigned long start, unsigned long nr_pages,
	    		       int write, int force, struct page **pages,
			       int *locked);
    long get_user_pages_unlocked(struct task_struct *tsk, struct mm_struct *mm,
				 unsigned long start, unsigned long nr_pages,
				 int write, int force, struct page **pages);
The former version is intended to be called with the
mmap_sem
semaphore held.  It may release that semaphore while running, in which case
*locked
will be set to zero.  The second form, instead, assumes
that
mmap_sem
is
not
held.  Using these functions in the
kernel improves performance by allowing
mmap_sem
to be dropped
while page-fault handling is in progress.  That is useful even in current
kernels, but, if handling of faults is going to be entrusted to user space,
it will become necessary.  Holding
mmap_sem
while calling out to
user space would not be a recipe for happy times.
The next step is to add the
MADV_USERFAULT
flag to the
madvise()
system call.  If that flag is set on a region of memory,
the kernel will no longer attempt to resolve page faults in that region.
Instead, in the absence of other measures (described below), the faulting
process will receive a
SIGBUS
signal.  That, 
of course, leaves the process in the position of having to resolve the page
fault on its own.  A tool provided to help with that task is the new
remap_anon_pages()
system call:
int remap_anon_pages(void *dest, void *src, unsigned long len,
    			 unsigned long flags);
This system call will take the pages holding
len
bytes starting at
src
and 
move them in the process's address space to the region starting at
dest
.  A number of conditions must be met for this operation to
succeed, starting with the fact that the full range in
dest
must
currently be unmapped —
remap_anon_pages()
will not overwrite an
existing page mapping.  The range in
src
, instead, must all be
present and mapped, and the pages cannot be shared with other processes.
All of these rules exist to simplify the implementation, but also to try to
catch race conditions in user-space fault handling.
If
src
is a huge page, and
len
is a multiple of 2MB, then
the full huge page(s) will be moved to
dest
without being split.
With this mechanism in place, an application's
SIGBUS
signal
handler can respond to a fault by allocating memory, filling it with the
needed contents, and mapping it into the proper location with
remap_anon_pages()
.  Once the signal handler returns, the page
fault will be retried, but, this time, the needed memory will be in place,
so application execution will continue.
Anybody who has worked with signal handlers on Unix-like systems is
probably thinking at this point that all that work does not belong in such
a handler.  And, indeed, signal handlers are not the way that processes are
expected to deal with page-fault handling.  To make life easier, Andrea
adds another system call:
int userfaultfd(int flags);
This call will return an open file descriptor which may be used to
communicate with the kernel about page fault handling.  The
flags
argument is mostly unused, though
O_NONBLOCK
may be provided to
request non-blocking behavior.
The first step after acquiring the file descriptor is for the application
to write a 64-bit integer indicating which version of the userfault
protocol it understands.  The kernel will respond with the same number if
the protocol is supported,
-1
otherwise.  Once agreement has been
reached in that area, the application can read a 64-bit address whenever a
page fault occurs.  It should resolve the fault, then write back two
pointers indicating the range of memory which has been mapped in response
to the fault.
The idea here is that a process can dedicate a thread to page-fault
handling.  Whenever a fault occurs, the faulting thread will pause while
the handler thread puts things in place.  No
SIGBUS
signals will
be delivered if
userfaultfd()
has been called.  So, for the
faulting thread, life just continues as usual, with the possible exception
that some page faults may take longer to handle than one might expect.
As was mentioned above, there might be multiple use cases for user-space
page fault handling.  What if a single application wishes to exercise more
than one of those cases?  To that end, the application can open more than
one file descriptor with
userfaultfd()
and restrict each to a
specific range of memory.  That restriction is requested by writing two pointers
indicating the range to be covered; the least-significant bit should be set
on the start pointer.  Thereafter, only faults within the given range will
be directed to that file descriptor.  The application must still set
MADV_USERFAULT
on the ranges in question.  Multiple ranges can be
set up to go to a single file descriptor, but a given range of memory can
only have its faults handled by a single descriptor.
The bulk of the commentary on the patch set has been around the
remap_anon_pages()
system call.  Linus initially
wondered
whether
remap_anon_pages()
made more sense than
remap_file_pages()
, which he called an
"
unmitigated disaster
" and which
may be removed
in the near future.  Later he
added
that he would prefer an interface
where the fault handler process would simply
write()
the data to
the page of interest, causing it to be allocated and mapped.  Andrea
responded
that such an interface might be
possible; the handler would write the data to the
userfaultfd()
file descriptor and the kernel would handle the rest.  But he worried about
losing the zero-copy behavior that was carefully designed into the current
interface.  Linus's
answer
to that made it
clear that he was not concerned about zero-copy behavior, which, he said,
is almost never worth the cost of implementing it.
What we may see is that the
get_user_pages()
optimizations will
find their way in relatively soon, though Linus
wasn't entirely happy
with those either.
The remaining work will take a while longer, and the end result seems
unlikely to include
remap_anon_pages()
.  But, given that the use case
is real, a significant improvement to live migration is going to be hard to
turn down in the long run.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Memory management/Virtualization
Kernel
remap_anon_pages()
Kernel
userfaultfd()
to post comments