# Some 3.18 development statistics [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
November 25, 2014 

As of the [3.18-rc6](/Articles/622882/) release, 11,186 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 3.18 development cycle. That makes this release about 1,000 changesets smaller than its immediate predecessors, but still not a slow development cycle by any means. Since this cycle is getting close to its end, it's a good time to look at where the code that came into the mainline during this cycle came from. (For those who are curious about what changes were merged, see [3.18 Merge window, part 1](/Articles/615327/), [part 2](/Articles/615825/), and [part 3](/Articles/617599/)). 

1,428 developers have contributed code to the 3.18 release — about normal for the last year or so. The most active developers were: 

> Most active 3.18 developers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> H Hartley Sweeten| 237| 2.1%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 179| 1.6%  
> Ian Abbott| 162| 1.4%  
> Geert Uytterhoeven| 121| 1.1%  
> Hans Verkuil| 100| 0.9%  
> Ville Syrjälä| 98| 0.9%  
> Navin Patidar| 98| 0.9%  
> Sujith Manoharan| 83| 0.7%  
> Johan Hedberg| 82| 0.7%  
> Eric Dumazet| 77| 0.7%  
> Lars-Peter Clausen| 75| 0.7%  
> Antti Palosaari| 72| 0.6%  
> Fabian Frederick| 71| 0.6%  
> Daniel Vetter| 70| 0.6%  
> Florian Fainelli| 70| 0.6%  
> Felipe Balbi| 70| 0.6%  
> Benjamin Romer| 68| 0.6%  
> Laurent Pinchart| 64| 0.6%  
> Andy Shevchenko| 62| 0.6%  
> Malcolm Priestley| 61| 0.5%  
> | By changed lines  
> ---  
> Larry Finger| 74831| 10.2%  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 73298| 10.0%  
> Hans Verkuil| 22266| 3.0%  
> Alexander Duyck| 16617| 2.3%  
> Greg Ungerer| 11981| 1.6%  
> Linus Walleij| 10628| 1.5%  
> John L. Hammond| 10269| 1.4%  
> Navin Patidar| 8148| 1.1%  
> Philipp Zabel| 7149| 1.0%  
> Martin Peres| 6890| 0.9%  
> Mark Einon| 6771| 0.9%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 6520| 0.9%  
> Ian Munsie| 5773| 0.8%  
> H Hartley Sweeten| 5134| 0.7%  
> Alexei Starovoitov| 4505| 0.6%  
> Yan, Zheng| 4485| 0.6%  
> Antti Palosaari| 4181| 0.6%  
> Roy Spliet| 3785| 0.5%  
> Christoph Hellwig| 3765| 0.5%  
> Juergen Gross| 3745| 0.5%  
  
As is usually the case, H. Hartley Sweeten tops the by-changesets list with the epic task of getting the Comedi drivers into shape in the staging tree. Mauro Carvalho Chehab, the Video4Linux2 maintainer, did a lot of cleanup work in that tree as well during this cycle, while Ian Abbott's changes were, once again, applied to the Comedi drivers. Geert Uytterhoeven did a lot of work in the ARM and driver trees, while Hans Verkuil also made a lot of improvements to the core Video4Linux2 subsystem. 

On the "lines changed" side, Larry Finger removed the r8192ee driver from the staging tree, while Greg Kroah-Hartman removed two other drivers from staging. Alexander Duyck added the "fm10k" driver for Intel FM10000 Ethernet switch host interfaces, and Greg Ungerer removed a bunch of old m68k code. 

Some 200 companies (that we were able to identify) supported development on the code merged for 3.18. The most active of those were: 

> Most active 3.18 employers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> (None)| 1244| 11.0%  
> Intel| 1238| 10.9%  
> Red Hat| 863| 7.6%  
> (Unknown)| 828| 7.3%  
> Samsung| 523| 4.6%  
> Linaro| 370| 3.3%  
> IBM| 340| 3.0%  
> SUSE| 326| 2.9%  
> Google| 324| 2.9%  
> (Consultant)| 321| 2.8%  
> Freescale| 238| 2.1%  
> FOSS Outreach Program for Women| 238| 2.1%  
> Vision Engraving Systems| 237| 2.1%  
> Texas Instruments| 199| 1.8%  
> Renesas Electronics| 179| 1.6%  
> MEV Limited| 162| 1.4%  
> Free Electrons| 155| 1.4%  
> Qualcomm| 141| 1.2%  
> Oracle| 135| 1.2%  
> ARM| 114| 1.0%  
> | By lines changed  
> ---  
> (None)| 185247| 25.3%  
> Linux Foundation| 73354| 10.0%  
> Intel| 73168| 10.0%  
> (Unknown)| 28460| 3.9%  
> Cisco| 27939| 3.8%  
> Red Hat| 27335| 3.7%  
> Linaro| 23586| 3.2%  
> Samsung| 19228| 2.6%  
> IBM| 18194| 2.5%  
> SUSE| 16736| 2.3%  
> Google| 14110| 1.9%  
> (Consultant)| 12455| 1.7%  
> Accelerated Concepts| 11986| 1.6%  
> Texas Instruments| 11305| 1.5%  
> C-DAC| 8400| 1.1%  
> Pengutronix| 8232| 1.1%  
> Freescale| 7265| 1.0%  
> (Academia)| 7076| 1.0%  
> Qualcomm| 5398| 0.7%  
> Code Aurora Forum| 5377| 0.7%  
  
(**Note** that the above table has been updated; the curious can see the original version published on this page [here](/Articles/624330/)). 

As is often the case, there are few surprises here. The level of contributions from developers working on their own time remains steady at about 11%, a level it has maintained since the 3.13 kernel. So it might be safe to say that, for now, the decline in volunteer contributions appears to have leveled out. 

How important are volunteer contributions to the Linux kernel? Many kernel developers started that way, so it is natural to think that a decline in volunteers will lead, eventually, to a shortage of kernel developers overall. As it happens, the period starting with the 3.13 release (roughly calendar year 2014) saw first-time contributions from 1,521 developers. Looking at who those developers worked for yields these results: 

> Employer| Developers  
> ---|---  
> (Unknown)| 651  
> (None)| 137  
> Intel| 115  
> Google| 37  
> Samsung| 35  
> Huawei| 33  
> IBM| 32  
> Red Hat| 25  
> Freescale| 21  
> Linaro| 17  
  
All told, 733 first-time developers were identifiably working for some company or other when their first patch was accepted into the mainline. A large portion of the unknowns above are probably volunteers, so one can guess that a roughly equal number of first-time developers were working on their own time. So roughly half of our new developers in the last year were volunteers. 

The picture changes a little, though, when one narrows things down to first-time developers who contributed to more than one release. When one looks at developers who contributed to three out of the last five releases, the picture is: 

> Employer| Developers  
> ---|---  
> (Unknown)| 48  
> Intel| 24  
> (None)| 21  
> Huawei| 10  
> IBM| 7  
> Samsung| 6  
> Outreach Program for Women| 6  
> ARM| 4  
> Linaro| 4  
> Red Hat| 3  
> Broadcom| 3  
  
Overall, 126 new developers contributing to at least three releases in the last year worked for companies at the time of their first contribution — rather more than the number of volunteers. So it seems fair to say that a lot of our new developers are getting their start within an employment situation, rather than contributing as volunteers then being hired. 

Where are these new developers working in the kernel? If one looks at all new developers, the staging tree comes out on top; 301 developers started there, compared to 122 in `drivers/net`, the second-most popular starting place. But the most popular place for a three-version developer to make their first contribution is in `drivers/net`; 25 new developers contributed there, while 20 contributed within the staging tree. So, while staging is arguably helping to bring in new developers, a lot of the developers who start there appear to not stay in the kernel community. 

Overall, the pattern looks reasonably healthy. There are multiple paths for developers looking to join our community, and it is possible for new developers to work almost anywhere in the kernel tree. That would help to explain how the kernel development community continues to grow over time. For now, there doesn't appear to be any reason to believe that we will not continue to crank out kernel releases at a high rate indefinitely.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/3.18](/Kernel/Index#Releases-3.18)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
