# Inheriting capabilities [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jake Edge**  
February 11, 2015 

Linux capabilities have long been seen as a way to avoid setuid programs, though the reality hasn't really lived up to the hope. While partitioning root privileges into distinct, fine-grained permissions has a lot of conceptual merit, the implementation suffers from a number of shortcomings that make it difficult to, say, use capabilities to allow `ping` and other utilities to run without being setuid root. Actually using capabilities has always been complex, and there are some fundamental limitations that are sometimes worked around in out-of-tree patches. A recent discussion on the linux-kernel mailing list looks at one of the limitations of the capabilities model, with an eye toward eliminating it. 

Under the current model, processes cannot easily pass their capabilities to another program through an `execve()` call in the same way that other privileges are inherited. Christoph Lameter [posted a patch](/Articles/631498/) that would allow administrators to specify which capabilities should be inherited by programs started by `execve()`. The idea is to allow privileged, non-setuid-root programs to spawn other programs with a limited set of privileges—exactly the kind of facility that capabilities are supposed to provide. 

We have [looked at Linux capabilities](/Kernel/Index/#Capabilities) multiple times over the years, often in the context of a new attempt to fix some of the deficiencies in the existing Linux capabilities model (which is derived from a defunct POSIX effort). For example, [file-based capabilities](/Articles/211883/) were added to use the extended attributes (xattrs) on program files to store capability information so that those capabilities were granted to programs when they were executed. Adding that allowed the [`CAP_SETPCAP` capability to return to its original meaning](/Articles/256519/) and provided a way for administrators to grant capabilities to individual programs (rather than running processes). There are other problems we have noted; in some sense, this article is a continuation of that trend. 

Lameter described his use case in the patch. He runs a network stack in user space that requires privileges for raw network access, but also may run arbitrary binary programs. He would like to restrict what those programs can do, but needs them to have a certain subset of root privileges. That could be done using setuid programs, but he would like to restrict those programs so that they don't get all of root's privileges. 

A [2006 LWN article](/Articles/199004/) that Lameter referenced in his posting describes the underpinnings of capabilities. In particular, it looks at the different capability sets and how they are combined to determine which capabilities a process has. 

This first patch from Lameter provides a way for an administrator to globally specify which capabilities should be inherited across `execve()`. Capability numbers could be written to a sysfs file, which would cause those capabilities to be inherited by any new program if the caller of `execve()` possessed them. He has been using a form of the patch in production for the last six years, but would like it (or something that solves the same problem) to go upstream, so that he doesn't need to continue carrying the patch in his kernels. 

The usual way to make a binary run with some capability is to put that capability in the "permitted" and "effective" sets of the binary using the file capabilities xattrs. Doing that makes those binaries _always_ have those capabilities, however, which may not be desired—especially for system binaries. Without putting file capabilities on many different binaries throughout the system, there is no way to pass `CAP_NET_RAW` (or others, such as `CAP_NET_ADMIN` and `CAP_SYS_NICE`) down to child processes or new programs started with `execve()`. Also, given that there is scripting (and `LD_PRELOAD`) involved in Lameter's use case, it would be necessary to give script interpreters (e.g. Bash, Python) whichever capabilities the scripts need—something that is not likely to lead to a more secure system. 

It looks like a fundamental limitation of the Linux capabilities model, but is hardly the first. Capabilities bits have been [arbitrarily chosen](/Articles/486306/) by kernel feature developers over the years, without much in the way of coordination. That has led to grab-bag capabilities like `CAP_SYS_ADMIN` that are effectively equivalent to root (though [there are others](http://forums.grsecurity.net/viewtopic.php?f=7&t=2522) where that is also true). Whatever can be said about the Linux capabilities feature, coherence in its design and implementation are not particularly evident. 

But people who want to use the feature keep running up against barriers to doing so. As Serge Hallyn, one of the developers of capabilities, [lamented](/Articles/632612/), it is still not possible to make `ping` use capabilities (rather than setuid) by default. That's because some filesystems don't have support for xattrs; it's also true for some of the tools, such as older versions of `tar` and current versions of `cpio` (though [work is being done](/Articles/632613/) to change that). 

But the global nature of the inheritance setting in Lameter's patch set was not popular. Both Hallyn and Andy Lutomirski suggested ways to make it a per-process or per-user-namespace setting. Hallyn [suggested](/Articles/632721/) adding an "ambient inheritable" set that would be combined with the inheritable set in a way that is somewhat analogous to the [capability bounding set](/1999/1202/kernel.php3). Lutomirski [thought](/Articles/632725/) that a single bit could be used to say that all files should be considered to have a full set of capabilities in their inherited set, which would basically have the same effect. 

But Casey Schaufler [objected](/Articles/632727/) to the idea that Lameter's use case was reasonable from a security perspective: ""You're getting into pretty sketchy territory using that kind of a programming model in a security enforcing environment."" Though he also responded to Lameter's claim that there is a ""capabilities mess"" that needs to be cleaned up: 

I'm game to participate in such an effort. The POSIX scheme is workable, but given that it's 20 years old and hasn't developed real traction it's hard to call it successful. 

There was some discussion of ways that capabilities could be improved but, as Lutomirski [noted](/Articles/632736/), none of that addressed the problem at hand: ""If I hold a capability and I want to pass that capability to an exec'd helper, I shouldn't need the fs's help to do this."" There was general agreement, though Hallyn [pointed out](/Articles/632739/) that using the filesystem to place capabilities on binaries is how POSIX capabilities work. 

One interesting side note from the discussion is that Lameter is not the only one to use inheritable capabilities in production: the MeeGo-based N9 phone from Nokia [did as well](/Articles/632740/). 

After that discussion, Lameter shifted gears, posting an [RFC patch](/Articles/632743/) to implement Hallyn's suggestion of an ambient capability set. That was met with a couple of objections on some of the specifics. To start with, adding capabilities to the ambient set should not enable capabilities that are not in the permitted set of the process, Lutomirski [said](/Articles/632776/). He also suggested that adding capabilities to the ambient set should require more than just having the `CAP_SETPCAP` capability. Requiring `PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS` (see this [article](/Articles/475678/) and [`Documentation/prctl/no_new_privs.txt`](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/prctl/no_new_privs.txt) for more information), so that `execve()` could not add any additional privileges, would make him more comfortable. But that ""would make the patch pointless"" because programs that require more privileges (e.g. setuid root programs) need to be run sometimes, Lameter [said](/Articles/632778/). 

Given Lameter's use case, requiring `PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS` would seem to be a non-starter, but he has addressed the other complaints from Lutomirski and Hallyn in his [V1 ambient capability set patch](/Articles/632113/). In that version, only capabilities that are permitted can be added to the ambient set. In addition, processes can clear their permitted set and be sure that no new capabilities will be granted to children or programs run via `execve()` based on the contents of the ambient set. That was one of the main concerns expressed about the RFC patch. 

As was noted in the threads, there are a number of barriers in the way of using capabilities on Linux systems. They are complex to reason about, have an API that is difficult to use, and have been inconsistently applied over the years. All of that is unfortunate, but any movement to remove capabilities and start over, as was suggested, is pretty unlikely to gain any traction. For good or ill, capabilities are part of the kernel ABI and are thus likely to be with us "forever". Changes like the ambient set may not reduce the complexity at all, but may help provide a more usable capabilities system going forward. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Capabilities](/Kernel/Index#Capabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Capabilities](/Security/Index/#Capabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel/Linux/POSIX capabilities](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel-LinuxPOSIX_capabilities)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
