# Testing power failures [LWN.net]

By
Jake Edge
March 18, 2015
LSFMM 2015
Trying to replicate failures that can happen in filesystems when the power
suddenly fails was the topic of a discussion led by Josef Bacik at the 2015
LSFMM Summit.  He has been working on a tool based on the device mapper to
try to make power-failure scenarios more reproducible, but he was wondering
if he should continue that work or shift to something else.
In Btrfs, he believes there are ways that the balancing operation can lead
to a corrupted filesystem if there is a power failure at just the "right"
moment.  He has not caught it yet, but the problem has inspired the
development of a new tool.
It uses the device mapper and two disks, one of which is the normal
filesystem and the 
other keeps a log of all the writes that go to the first disk.  The log
disk keeps a list of all the write operations that have completed, which is
updated with each flush operation to the first disk.
The tool has been integrated into xfstests and works for ext4 and XFS as
well as Btrfs.  It does take a good bit longer on those other two
filesystems, but it works.     The idea is to be able to test "weird
interactions", where 
the filesystem is fine at point A and at point B but, if the power fails in
between those points, the filesystem gets corrupted. Bacik asked: does this log approach
make sense?
Someone asked about using fault injection instead.  But Bacik wants these
tests to be generic for any filesystem without adding code to the kernel.
Logging allows for replaying the problem.  It is also finer-grained, as you
can check the filesystem consistency at each flush.
He would like others to look at his assumptions to help ensure he isn't off
base. He is only logging information for write operations that have
completed.  The tool drops all writes that have not completed at flush time.
There was a suggestion that
blktrace
could be changed to log the data that is being written.  Bacik seemed
to be leaning toward dropping his tool in favor of that, but Chris Mason
wondered about maintaining the ordering of writes using
blktrace
.
One attendee said that
blktrace
has sequence numbers that are
maintained per-CPU but are not 
synchronized, so the order of the writes may not be preserved.  Since the
device mapper does preserve that order, Bacik concluded that he would
finish up that tool, rather than switch.
[I would like to thank the Linux Foundation for travel support to Boston
for the summit.]
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Development tools
Conference
Storage, Filesystem, and Memory-Management Summit/2015
to post comments