# Persistent memory support progress [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
April 15, 2015 

Persistent memory (or non-volatile memory) has a number of nice features: it doesn't lose its contents when power is cycled, it is fast, and it is expected to be available in large quantities. Enabling proper support for this memory in the kernel has been a topic of discussion and development for some years; it was, predictably, an important topic at this year's [Linux Storage, Filesystem, and Memory Management Summit](/Articles/lsfmm2015/). The 4.1 kernel will contain a new driver intended to improve support for persistent memory, but there is still a fair amount of work to be done. 

At a first glance, persistent memory looks like normal RAM to the processor, so it might be tempting to simply use it that way. There are, though, some good reasons for not doing that. The performance characteristics of persistent memory are still not quite the same as RAM; in particular, write operations can be slower. Persistent memory may not wear out as quickly as older flash arrays did, but it is still best to avoid rewriting it many times per second, as could happen if it were used as regular memory. And the persistence of persistent memory is a valuable feature to take advantage of in its own right — but, to do so, the relevant software must know which memory ranges in the system are persistent. So persistent memory needs to be treated a bit differently. 

The usual approach, at least for a first step, is to separate persistent memory from normal RAM and treat it as if it were a block device. Various drivers implementing this type of access have been circulating for a while now. It appears that [this driver from Ross Zwisler](/Articles/640114/) will be merged for the 4.1 release. It makes useful reading as it is something close to the simplest possible example of a working block device driver. It takes a region of memory, registers a block device to represent that memory, and implements block read and write operations with `memcpy()` calls. 

In [his pull request](/Articles/640115/) to merge this driver, Ingo Molnar noted that a number of features that one might expect, including `mmap()` and execute-in-place, are not supported yet, and that persistent-memory contents would be copied in the page cache. What Ingo had missed is that the [DAX patch set](/Articles/610174/) providing direct filesystem access to persistent memory was merged for the 4.0 release. If a DAX-supporting filesystem (ext4 now, XFS soon) is built in a persistent memory region, file I/O will avoid the page cache and operations like `mmap()` will be properly supported. 

That said, there are a few things that still will not work quite as expected. One of those is `mlock()`, which, as Yigal Korman [pointed out](/Articles/640118/), may seem a bit strange: data stored in persistent memory is almost by definition locked in memory. As [noted](/Articles/640119/) by Kirill Shutemov, though, supporting `mlock()` is not a simple no-op; the required behavior depends on how the memory mapping was set up in the first place. Private mappings still need copy-on-write semantics, for example. A perhaps weirder case is direct I/O: if a region of persistent memory is mapped into a process's address space, the process cannot perform direct I/O between that region and an ordinary file. There may also be problems with direct memory access (DMA) I/O operations, some network transfers, and the `vmsplice()` system call, among others. 

#### Whither struct page?

In almost all cases, the restrictions with persistent memory come down to the lack of `page` structures for that memory. A `page` structure represents a page of physical memory in the system memory map; it contains just about everything the kernel knows about that page and how it is being used. See [this article](/Articles/565097/) for the gory details of what can be found there. These structures are used with many internal kernel APIs that deal with memory. Persistent memory, lacking corresponding `page` structures, cannot be used with those APIs; as a result, various things don't work with persistent memory. 

Kernel developers have hesitated to add persistent memory to the system memory map because persistent-memory arrays are expected to be large — in the terabyte range. With the usual 4KB page size, 1TB of persistent memory would need 256 million `page` structures which would occupy several gigabytes of RAM. And they do need to be stored in RAM, rather than in the persistent memory itself; `page` structures can change frequently, so storing them in memory that is subject to wear is not advisable. Rather than dedicate a large chunk of RAM to the tracking of persistent memory, the development community has, so far, chosen to treat that memory as a separate type of device. 

At some point, though, a way to lift the limitations around persistent memory will need to be found. There appear to be two points of view on how that might be done. One says that `page` structures should never be used with persistent memory. The logical consequence of this view is that the kernel interfaces that currently use `page` structures need to be changed to use something else — page-frame numbers, for example — that works with both RAM and persistent memory. Dan Williams posted [a patch removing `struct page` usage from the block layer](/Articles/636968/) in March. It is not for the faint of heart: just over 100 files are touched to make this change. That led to complaints from some developers that getting rid of `struct page` usage in APIs would involve a lot of high-risk code churn and remove a useful abstraction while not necessarily providing a lot of benefit. 

The alternative would be to bite the bullet and add `struct page` entries for persistent memory regions. Boaz Harrosh [posted a patch to that end](/Articles/608538/) in August 2014; it works by treating persistent memory as a range of hot-pluggable memory and allocating the memory-map entries at initialization time. The patch is relatively simple, but it does nothing to address the memory-consumption issue. 

In the long run, the solution may take the form of something like a `page` structure that represents a larger chunk of memory. One obvious possibility is to make a version of `struct page` that refers to a huge page; that has the advantage of using a size that is understood by the processor's memory-management unit and would integrate well with the transparent huge page mechanism. An alternative would be a variable-size extent structure as is used by more recent filesystems. Either way, the changes required would be huge, so this is not something that is going to happen in the near future. 

What will happen is that persistent memory devices will work on Linux as a storage medium for the major filesystems, providing good performance. There will be some rough edges with specific features that do not work, but most users are unlikely to run into them. With 4.1, the kernel will have a level of support for persistent-memory devices to allow that hardware to be put to good use, and to allow users to start figuring out what they actually want to do with that much fast, persistent storage.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Memory management/Nonvolatile memory](/Kernel/Index#Memory_management-Nonvolatile_memory)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
