# 4.1 Merge window, part 1 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
April 15, 2015 

Linus started merging changes for the 4.1 development cycle on April 13; as of this writing, a total of 3,643 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline. In other words, things are just getting started. Still, some interesting changes have found their way in, though many of them will be of interest mainly to kernel developers. 

Some of the more interesting, user-visible changes merged so far include: 

  * Basic support for live kernel patching has been added to the S/390 architecture. What has been removed from S/390, instead, is support for the [31-bit mode](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/31-bit), once needed to get past that pesky 16MB memory limit. 

  * KVM virtualization on the MIPS architecture has gained support for the floating-point unit and the SIMD mode. KVM on ARM now supports interrupt injection via `irqfd()`. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

  * Load tracking in the CPU scheduler has been reworked to make the calculated process loads be independent of CPU speeds. That will enable better load-balancing decisions in the presence of frequency scaling and improve support for asymmetric systems like big.LITTLE where different types of CPUs are found in the same package. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **I2C** : Digicolor I2C controllers, Ingenic JZ4780 I2C controllers, and Broadcom XLP9xx/XLP5xx I2C controllers. 

    * **IIO** : Capella CM3323 color light sensors and Measurement Specialties MS5611 pressure sensors. 

    * **Input** : Broadcom keypad controllers, MAXIM MAX77843 haptic controllers, iPAQ h3100/h3600/h3700 buttons, Semtech SX8654 I2C touchscreens, Qualcomm PM8941 performance management IC (PMIC) power keys, Broadcom IPROC touchscreens, and ChipOne icn8318 I2C touchscreen controllers. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : Nuvoton NCT7904 hardware-monitoring chips, Broadcom IPROC SD/MMC and PCIe controllers, Dialog DA9150 charger and fuel-gauge controllers, X-Powers AXP288 fuel gauges, Nokia modems implementing the CMT speech protocol, Silicon Motion SM750 framebuffers, Ilitek ILI9163 LCD controllers, and Freescale Management Complex buses. 

    * **Multi-function device** : Wolfson Microelectronics WM8280/WM8281 controllers, MediaTek MT6397 PMICs, Maxim Semiconductor MAX77843 PMICs, Intel Quark controllers, and Skyworks Solutions SKY81452 controllers. 

    * **Pin control** : Marvell Armada 39x pin controllers, NVIDIA Tegra210 pinmux controllers, Broadcom Cygnus IOMUX controllers, Mediatek mt8135 pin controllers, AMD platform pin controllers, and Intel Sunrisepoint pin controllers. 

    * **USB** : AltusMetrum ChaosKey random-number generators, TI dm816x USB PHYs, and Allwinner sun9i USB PHYs. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The kernel self-test code has gained an `install` target that installs test binaries into a special directory in the kernel tree. There is also a new set of timer self tests in the test suite. 

  * The new `efi=debug` boot option causes extra information to be printed at boot time on systems with EFI firmware. 

  * The long-deprecated `IRQF_DISABLED` interrupt flag has finally been removed from the kernel. 

  * The "tracefs" virtual filesystem has been added. Tracefs contains the usual set of directories and files to control tracing, but it has the advantage that it can be mounted independently of debugfs. It thus allows system administrators to enable tracing without bringing in the other, potentially dangerous knobs found in debugfs. By default, tracefs will be mounted in the usual place (`/sys/kernel/debug/tracing`) when debugfs is mounted. 

  * The new `TRACE_DEFINE_ENUM()` macro can be used to output values from `enum` types in tracepoints. 

  * As usual, the `perf` tool has seen a long list of additions and improvements; see [the top-level merge commit](http://git.kernel.org/linus/6c8a53c9e6a151fffb07f8b4c34bd1e33dddd467) for details. Some of the more significant features include the ability to attach BPF programs to kernel probes, support for Intel's upcoming [processor trace](https://software.intel.com/en-us/blogs/2013/09/18/processor-tracing) functionality (""a hardware tracer on steroids""), support for Intel's upcoming cache quality-of-service monitoring feature, and more. 

  * The I2C subsystem can now function in "slave" mode, responding to a master controller elsewhere on the bus; see [Documentation/i2c/slave-interface](/Articles/640346/) for details. The I2C layer has also gained a new quirk mechanism that can be used to describe the limitations of specific controllers. 




Unless something surprising happens, the merge window can be expected to stay open through April 27. There will likely be a lull in the middle while Linus travels, but that has tended to not slow things down too much in the past. As usual, we will continue to track and report on the significant changes merged for the 4.1 development cycle.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.1](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.1)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
