# Pagemap: security fixes vs. ABI compatibility [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
April 29, 2015
The kernel development community maintains a strong commitment to ABI
compatibility; as a general rule, changes that will break existing
applications are not allowed.  But the community is also committed to
fixing known security problems.  There are times when a security issue
cannot be fixed without changing the way a user-visible interface works,
and that can lead to problems.  One such situation has come up as the
result of a change merged for the 4.0 kernel.
Back in 2008, the 2.6.25 kernel included
a
patch
adding a new virtual file (called
pagemap
) to each
process's
/proc
directory.  That file contains an array of 64-bit
values describing each page in the process's virtual address space.  If the
page is currently resident, the physical page-frame number will be given;
otherwise, information on how to find the page in swap is provided.  The
original purpose for the
pagemap
file was to enable investigations
into which pages were resident and which were shared with other processes.
Documentation/vm/pagemap.txt
has
information on what can be found in this file.
At the time this patch was merged, there appeared to be no harm in exposing
the physical page-frame information.  Since then, though, sentiments have
turned against disclosing internal kernel information that is not strictly
needed by user space.  That, alone, might have eventually inspired somebody
to remove the page-frame number from the
pagemap
file but, as it
happens, something else came along first.
That something is the "
rowhammer
vulnerability
," wherein the contents of a memory area can be changed by
repeatedly hammering on a nearby memory area.  If an attacker wanted to use
this technique to compromise a system, the first order of business would be
to obtain access to a page of memory physically adjacent to the memory that
is targeted to be changed.  The contents of the
pagemap
file, by
providing the physical location of every page mapped in the system, would
obviously be most helpful in such a situation.  There will probably be
other ways for an attacker to determine how pages are laid out in physical
memory, but
pagemap
is almost certainly the easiest way.
To make life harder for attackers attempting to exploit the rowhammer
vulnerability,
a simple patch
was merged
for the 4.0-rc5 release in March.  The patch turned the
pagemap
file into a privileged interface; attempts to open it will
now fail unless the process in question has the
CAP_SYS_ADMIN
capability.  The 4.0 release came out with that restriction in place, and
everybody who was paying attention slept a little easier.
But that rest appears to have come at the cost of some
sleepless nights elsewhere.  It turns out that
the UndoDB debugger uses the
pagemap
file
to track changes to memory.  When changes need to be tracked, the
debugger will
fork()
the process, putting all of its writable
memory into copy-on-write mode.  After running the operation of interest (a
system call, normally), the debugger can scan the
pagemap
file to
see which pages have changed page-frame numbers; those are the pages that
were written to, and, thus, copied.  Without access to
pagemap
,
UndoDB cannot get this information and, as a result, it no longer works.
In some situations of this type, one might just argue that the tool in
question should be run as root.  But that is not generally a desirable way
to run an interactive debugging tool.  So some other sort of solution must
be found, or UndoDB will remain broken.  There are cases where "remains
broken" may be the final outcome; as Linus
said
in response to the report, "
the one
exception to the regression rule is 'security fixes'
".  But,
fortunately, there appear to be some better options available this time
around.
One possibility would be to restore access to the
pagemap
file but
to somehow scramble the page-frame numbers before reporting them to user
space.  That would work for UndoDB, since it doesn't care about the actual
page-frame numbers; it is only looking for changes.  Linus was not
convinced that this was the right way to go, though:
However, I don't believe that we have a good enough scrambling
	model to make that reasonable. Remember: any attacker will be able
	to see our scrambling code, so it would need to be both
	cryptographically secure *and* use a truly random per-VM secret
	key. Quite frankly, that's a _lot_ of effort for dubious gain...
Andy Lutomirski also
pointed out
that even
scrambled page-frame numbers might be enough for an attacker to obtain some
memory-adjacency information.  So that approach does not appear to be
viable.
The alternative is to simply report the page-frame numbers as zero in the
absence of
CAP_SYS_ADMIN
.  That would make the rest of the
information in
pagemap
available while not exposing the page-frame
information.  The bad news is that always-zero page-frame numbers are not
helpful for UndoDB.  The good news, though, is that there is something else
in
pagemap
that is just as useful.
That "something else" is the "soft-dirty" mechanism added to the 3.11
kernel in support of the
checkpoint-restore in user space
(CRIU)
effort.  Along with the
page-frame number,
each
pagemap
entry contains a soft-dirty bit that is meant to
track pages that have 
been written to.  All of the soft-dirty bits for a process can be reset to
zero by writing to the
clear_refs
file in that process's
/proc
directory.  Thereafter, the soft-dirty
bit will be set whenever that process writes to a given page.  CRIU uses
this mechanism to find pages that have been changed during the checkpoint
process, but it also will work for the UndoDB case.  (See
Documentation/vm/soft-dirty.txt
for details on
the soft-dirty mechanism).
So the probable outcome in this case is that
pagemap
will, once
again, become globally readable.  But it will contain no useful page-frame
numbers unless the reading process had
CAP_SYS_ADMIN
when it
opened the file.  That will make UndoDB users happy again while preserving
the security objectives of the original patch.  So this story has a happy
ending — unless, of course, another user who truly needs the page-frame
number information steps forward.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Development model/User-space ABI
Kernel
Memory management
to post comments