# Memory protection keys [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
May 13, 2015 

The memory-management units built into most contemporary processors are able to control access to memory on a per-page basis. Operating systems like Linux make that control available to applications in user space; the protection bits supplied to system calls like `mmap()` and `mprotect()` allow a process to say whether any given page should be readable, writable, or executable. This level of protection has served for a long time, so one might be tempted to conclude that it provides everything that applications need. But a new hardware feature under development at Intel suggests otherwise; the first round of patches to support this feature explore how programs might gain access to this feature. 

This feature is called "memory protection keys" (MPK); it will only be available in future 64-bit Intel processors. When this feature is enabled, four (previously unused) bits in each page-table entry can be used to assign one of sixteen "key" values to any given page. There is also a new 32-bit processor register with two bits for each key value. Setting the "write disable" bit for a given key will block all attempts to write a page with that key value; setting the "access disable" bit will block reads as well. The MPK feature thus allows a process to partition its memory into a maximum of sixteen regions and to selectively disable or enable access to any of those regions. The control register is local to each thread, so different threads can enable or disable different regions independently. 

A [patch set](/Articles/643617/) enabling the MPK feature has been posted by Dave Hansen for review even though, as he noted, nobody outside of Intel will be able to actually run that code at this time. Dave is hoping to get comments on the (minimal) user-space API changes needed to support MPK once the hardware is available. 

In the proposed design, applications can set the page keys using any of the system calls that set the other page protections — `mprotect()`, for example. There are four new flags defined (`PROT_PKEY0` through `PROT_PKEY3`) to represent the key bits. Within the kernel, these bits are stored in the virtual memory area (VMA), and pushed into the relevant location in the hardware page tables. If a process attempts to access a page in a way that is not allowed by the protection keys, it will get the usual `SIGSEGV` signal. Should it catch that signal, it can look for the new `SEGV_PKUERR` code (in the `si_code` field of the `siginfo_t` structure passed to the handler) to detect a fault caused by a protection key. There is not currently a way to determine which key caused the fault, but adding that is on the list of things to do in the future. 

One might well wonder why this feature is needed when everything it does can be achieved with the memory-protection bits that already exist. The problem with the current bits is that they can be expensive to manipulate. A change requires invalidating translation lookaside buffer (TLB) entries across the entire system, which is bad enough, but changing the protections on a region of memory can require individually changing the page-table entries for thousands (or more) pages. Instead, once the protection keys are set, a region of memory can be enabled or disabled with a single register write. For any application that frequently changes the protections on regions of its address space, the performance improvement will be large. 

There is still the question (as [asked](/Articles/643806/) by Ingo Molnar) of just why a process would want to make this kind of frequent memory-protection change. There would appear to be a few use cases driving this development. One is the handling of sensitive cryptographic data. A network-facing daemon could use a cryptographic key to encrypt data to be sent over the wire, then disable access to the memory holding the key (and the plain-text data) before writing the data out. At that point, there is no way that the daemon can leak the key or the plain text over the wire; protecting sensitive data in this way might also make applications a bit more resistant to attack. 

Another commonly mentioned use case is to protect regions of data from being corrupted by "stray" write operations. An in-memory database could prevent writes to the actual data most of the time, enabling them only briefly when an actual change needs to be made. In this way, database corruption due to bugs could be fended off, at least some of the time. Ingo was [unconvinced](/Articles/643808/) by this use case; he suggested that a 64-bit address space should be big enough to hide data in and protect it from corruption. He also [suggested](/Articles/643809/) that a version of `mprotect()` that optionally skipped TLB invalidation could address many of the performance issues, especially if huge pages were used. Alan Cox [responded](/Articles/643810/), though, that there is real-world demand for the ability to change protection on gigabytes of memory at a time, and that `mprotect()` is simply too slow. 

Being able to turn off unexpected writes could be especially useful when the underlying memory is a persistent memory device; any erroneous write there will go immediately to permanent storage. There have also been suggestions that tools like [Valgrind](http://valgrind.org/) could make good use of MPK. 

Ingo's concerns notwithstanding, the MPK hardware feature is being added in response to customer interest; it would be surprising if the kernel did not end up supporting it, especially given that the required changes are not hugely invasive. So the real question is whether the proposed user-space API is correct and supportable in the long run. Hopefully, developers who think they might make use of this feature will take a look at the patches and make themselves heard if they find something they don't like.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Memory protection keys](/Kernel/Index#Memory_protection_keys)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Security technologies](/Kernel/Index#Security-Security_technologies)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
