# Pathname lookup in Linux [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

June 24, 2015

This article was contributed by Neil Brown

One of the changes that was [recently merged](https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=052b398a43a7de8c68c13e7fa05d6b3d16ce6801) for Linux 4.2 is a substantial rewrite of parts of the pathname-lookup code in the Linux virtual filesystem (VFS) layer. This rewrite primarily affects the handling of symbolic links — though, like many such rewrites, opportunities were found to rationalize and improve other parts of the code, too. With all this change, it seems like a good opportunity to document just how pathname lookup works. While such documentation cannot stay current indefinitely, writing it immediately after a big change might increase the time until it becomes inaccurate.

The most obvious aspect of pathname lookup, which very little exploration is needed to discover, is that it is complex. There are many rules, special cases, and implementation alternatives that all combine to confuse the unwary reader. Computer science has long been acquainted with such complexity and has tools to help manage it. One tool that we will make extensive use of is "divide and conquer". For the early parts of the analysis we will divide off symlinks, leaving them until the final part. Well before we get to symlinks we have another major division based on the VFS's approach to locking which will allow us to review "REF-walk" and "RCU-walk" (a pair of algorithms that have been [described previously](https://lwn.net/Articles/419811/)) separately. But we are getting ahead of ourselves. There are some important low-level distinctions we need to clarify first.

#### There are two sorts of ...

Pathnames (sometimes "file names"), used to identify objects in the filesystem, will be familiar to most readers. They contain two sorts of elements: "slashes" that are sequences of one or more "`/`" characters, and "components" that are sequences of one or more non-"`/`" characters. These form two kinds of paths. Those that start with slashes are "absolute" and start from the filesystem root. The others are "relative" and start from the current directory, or from some other location specified by a file descriptor given to a "xxx`at()`" system call such as [`openat()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/openat.2.html).

It is tempting to describe the second kind as starting with a component, but that isn't always accurate: a pathname can lack both slashes and components; it can be empty, in other words. This is generally forbidden in POSIX, but some of those "xxx`at()`" system calls in Linux permit it when the `AT_EMPTY_PATH` flag is given. For example, if you have an open file descriptor on an executable file, you can execute it by calling [`execveat()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/execveat.2.html), passing the file descriptor, an empty path, and the `AT_EMPTY_PATH` flag.

These paths can be divided into two sections: the final component and everything else. The "everything else" is the easy bit. In all cases it must identify a directory that already exists, otherwise an error such as `ENOENT` or `ENOTDIR` will be reported. The final component is not so simple. Not only do different system calls interpret it quite differently (e.g. some create it, some do not), but it might not even exist: neither the empty pathname nor the pathname that is just slashes have a final component. If it does exist, it could be "`.`" or "`..`" which are handled quite differently from other components.

If a pathname ends with a slash, such as "`/tmp/foo/`" it might be tempting to consider that to have an empty final component. In many ways that would lead to correct results, but not always. In particular, `mkdir()` and `rmdir()` each create or remove a directory named by the final component, and they are required to work with pathnames ending in "`/`". According to [POSIX](http://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/basedefs/V1_chap04.html#tag_04_12): 

A pathname that contains at least one non-<slash> character and that ends with one or more trailing <slash> characters shall not be resolved successfully unless the last pathname component before the trailing <slash> characters names an existing directory or a directory entry that is to be created for a directory immediately after the pathname is resolved.
