# Nested NMIs lead to CVE-2015-3290 [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jake Edge**  
August 26, 2015 

Non-maskable interrupts (or NMIs) are a hardware feature that is typically used to signal hardware errors or other unrecoverable faults. They differ from regular interrupts in that they can occur when interrupts are otherwise blocked (i.e. they are not maskable). NMIs can be caused by user-space programs, though, so their handling in the kernel needs to be bulletproof or it can lead to security holes. Since the beginning of 2014, it would seem that NMI handling has been subject to races that allow user-space programs to elevate their privileges—a bug that is known as [CVE-2015-3290](https://access.redhat.com/security/cve/CVE-2015-3290). 

NMIs are used by profiling and debugging tools, such as perf, to determine where in the code the CPU is currently executing. NMIs also [get nested](/Articles/484932/), effectively, when an NMI handler causes an exception like a breakpoint or a page fault. Handling that nesting is complicated, which is what went astray and led to the bug. 

The first notification about the problem came in a July 22 [post](/Articles/655430/) to the oss-security mailing list from Andy Lutomirski about a number of NMI-handling security bugs. All are security-related, but one was embargoed to allow distributions to fix it before releasing any details. So he mentioned CVE-2015-3290 without giving any details, though he did include something of a warning: ""*Patch your systems*"". 

The details came in a post-embargo [advisory](/Articles/655436/) from Lutomirski on August 4. In some detail, he described the problem, but also provided a proof-of-concept program to tickle the bug. It requires that user space be able to do two things: arrange for nested NMIs to occur and for those NMIs return to a 16-bit stack, which is normally done for running 16-bit binaries using programs like [DOSEMU](http://sourceforge.net/projects/dosemu/). A 16-bit stack can be arranged via the [`modify_ldt()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/modify_ldt.2.html) system call. One way to generate the NMIs required is to be run with a heavy perf load, as the proof-of-concept exploit suggests. 

The Linux nested-NMI handling relies on a small section of code that needs to be run atomically. That works fine on x86_64 when using `iret` to return to a 64-bit stack (which effectively does the needed steps in an atomic manner), but when the NMI is returning to a segment with a 16-bit stack, `iret` does not restore the register state correctly. So the kernel has a workaround (called "espfix64") that tries to handle that situation by doing a complicated stack-switching dance. 

That stack switching is where the problem lies. There are approximately 19 instructions where a second (i.e. nested) NMI will cause the "atomic" section to not be atomic. Furthermore, an attacker who can arrange (or luck into) landing in a two-instruction window in those instructions will be able to reliably elevate their privileges to that of root. During that window, the attacker controls the address where the return from interrupt will go. Outside of the window, a nested NMI will cause various failures and crashes, which Lutomirski's exploit will fix up while it waits for one to hit the window: 

A careful exploit (attached) can recover from all the crashy failures and can regenerate a valid *privileged* state if a nested NMI occurs during the two-instruction window. This exploit appears to work reasonably quickly across a fairly wide range of Linux versions. 

The espfix64 code was added in Linux 3.13, which was released over a year and a half ago in January 2014. Given that Lutomirski's proof of concept works quickly, that means there are (or, hopefully, _were_) a lot of systems that could be easily affected by this flaw. 

The [fix](https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=810bc075f78ff2c221536eb3008eac6a492dba2d) uses a ""sneaky trick"", according to Lutomirski. Instead of checking the value of the 64-bit stack pointer register (i.e. `RSP`) to see if it points at the NMI stack to determine if there is a nested NMI, a different test is used. As he pointed out, malicious user-space code could point `RSP` there, issue a system call, then cause an NMI to happen, which would fool the kernel into believing it was processing a nested NMI when it wasn't. 

Lutomirski uses the fact that the "direction flag" (DF) bit in the `FLAGS` register is atomically reset by the `iret` instruction, so he sets that bit to indicate that the kernel is processing an NMI. His fix also changes the system-call entry point so that a user-space program cannot set DF while it still controls the value of RSP. 

CVE-2015-3290 and the rest of the NMI-handling problems that Lutomirski has found seem a little concerning, overall. NMIs are complex beasties and their handling even more so. It would be surprising if there are not other problems lurking there. But, for now, taking Lutomirski's advice should be high on everyone's list. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security](/Kernel/Index#Security)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
