# The LPC Android microconference, part 2 [LWN.net]

September 14, 2015
This article was contributed by Nathalie Chan King Choy and John Stultz
Linux Plumbers Conference
The Linux Plumbers Android microconference was held in Seattle on August
20th. It included discussions of a variety of topics, many of which
need to be coordinated within the Android ecosystem. The microconference
was split up into two separate sessions; this summary covers the second
session, which was held for three hours in the evening. Topics were toybox
in Android, improving AOSP vendor trees, providing per-task quality of
service, and improving big.LITTLE on Android.
The first session's summary can be found
here
.
Toybox in Android
Rob Landley started the second
half of the microconference with some background on the
toybox project
, which has recently
been
included
in the Android Open Source
Project (AOSP), replacing some components of
Android's toolbox
. Landley
described his early attempts to learn how to build a 
distribution from scratch, starting in 1999, which he would use to create his
Aboriginal Linux project
. He picked up the
BusyBox tool
for his project and, after improving it, became the maintainer.
It was after the GPLv3 came out that the trouble started, Landley
said. Some code contributed to BusyBox was GPLv2-only, which caused trouble
with relicensing. So efforts to audit the code, then remove and replace any
GPLv2-only submissions, were made. He became disillusioned with what he saw
as the "breaking" of "the GPL", as no longer was there just "the GPL", and
it was no longer a universal receiver of code. In the past, most
open-source licenses were GPL-compatible and could be up-converted to GPL
as needed. With the introduction of GPLv3, along with lots of GPLv2-only code in existence, suddenly this was no longer the case. He handed over BusyBox maintainership to the best person he knew for the job, and started playing with toybox, which he wrote under what he calls a
"BSD zero-clause" license
—basically public-domain—which would allow the code to be compatible with any other license.
However, soon after starting toybox, he mothballed the project. This was
mostly due to the fact that he liked the new BusyBox maintainer and didn't
want to undermine the project by leaving and immediately starting a
competitor. Also BusyBox had a ten-year head start, which made it
intimidating to try to catch up.
Landley then started talking about a
paper
he had co-written a decade ago
that described how big transitions in
computing are always opportunities, since big established players are often
unseated by smaller upstarts. The paper was focused on the transition to
64-bit systems and how this was an opportunity for Linux to unseat
Windows.
Landley realized that the transition to mobile was a similar major
transition, and Apple's iOS was likely to eventually unseat existing
workstations if it were to become dominant. He saw Android as thus becoming
an important vehicle for the preservation of a non-proprietary future. His
history 
with Aboriginal Linux made him interested in trying to make Android
self-hosting. Unfortunately, due to
Android not
accepting any GPL code in user space
, BusyBox would not be able to be used, but toybox could be. Thus, he restarted development on toybox.
At this point, Karim Yaghmour had a few questions, the first being: how
far is toybox currently away from BusyBox? Landley pointed to a
online status page
that
explains (with a somewhat complicated key) what parts are left to do. There
is also a
roadmap
,
which helps show the scope of what the project is trying to  achieve. That
list includes: POSIX-2008, Linux Standard Base (LSB), a self-hosting
environment, as well as fully replacing Android's toolbox and Tizen's core
tools.
Yaghmour also asked which commands from toybox have not yet replaced the
equivalents in Android's toolbox. Again, he referred people to the status
page, but Landley also pointed out that you can look in AOSP at the
toolbox
Android.mk
file
, which will clarify which non-toybox tools are
still being used. Landley noted that  Elliott Hughes of the Android team
has been helping with some of the testing of toybox. Hughes syncs upstream
toybox to the AOSP tree every two weeks.
At this point the talk ran out of time.
Improving vendor AOSP repositories
The next talk (
slides
[PDF]
) was a discussion led by John Stultz from Linaro on some of the
issues he's seen in various vendor trees, and what might be done to improve
things. Most vendors utilize a fork-and-try-to-forget model with AOSP,
targeting each device with its own tree. Linaro isn't any different,
really, as it maintains quite a number of separate AOSP trees for efforts
like
96board
support, work on
Project Ara
, as well as for other
projects. This behavior is problematic, since it makes operating system
updates more complicated, so vendor device updates suffer. That results in real security difficulties, as recently seen with the
Stagefright issue
.
Additionally, devices do tend to include functionality from a number of
different vendors: a system-on-chip (SoC) from one vendor, Bluetooth and
WiFi from another, sensors from another, etc. As noted in previous talks in
the microconference, integrating vendor hardware abstraction layers (HALs)
into an AOSP repository is usually a non-trivial process. HALs do not
integrate into the tree in a uniform way and some vendor HALs require
tweaks to the framework layer. This all complicates things further when it
comes time to handle a release update, since there are now multiple parties
that are being depended on for updates, which all have to be integrated
together.
Another area of pain is the build system. The
device.mk
and
BoardConfig.mk
files used to describe the device usually contain a
large set of global build variables, which have no expressions of
inter-dependencies (for example, enabling
BOARD_HAVE_BLUETOOTH_BCM
won't do anything if one forgets to
enable
BOARD_HAVE_BLUETOOTH
), and the
device.mk
files
that list out the
PRODUCT_PACKAGES
to be included have a ton of
duplication from device to device. In fact, it seems most vendors create
mid-layer common directories and have logic to try to share some of the
standard entries for different devices, just to avoid the heavy duplication
required.
AOSP is not really structured to be able to host community
contributions, which is
another issue. Google has reasonably limited AOSP to hosting
device-specific code only for Nexus
devices, which the company is able to test and maintain. While this is a
understandable and practical decision for Google, it keeps vendors and
others in the community working in their own private trees. Since there's
no reason to submit code, this results in a limited culture of review, so
there isn't necessarily a community sense for what is good or bad code.
Further, there's a missing sense of best-practices. This may not be true
for some vendors who are closer partners with Google, but for the
wider community that can't attend the private boot-camp meetings, it is.
There is
a lack of documentation, so things like HAL integration approaches often
end up being done in a cargo-cult manner. Improving documentation and
having better examples are areas that need work.
After running through the issues, the discussion was opened up to try to
see what could be done to improve things, and not just from the "Google
should do X" angle, but also what the community-at-large could potentially implement.
One question was "should HALs be submitted to AOSP?", but since AOSP
doesn't accept non-Nexus device support, this didn't seem
appropriate. Additionally, many HALs are completely proprietary, so
licensing issues would prevent that from happening. There is also the fact
that vendors are quite often focused on shipping products, so it's not
clear that, even if the code was welcome to be submitted for review,
many vendors would take the extra time required to deal with the feedback
of that code review. So the angle of finding processes to make things easier
for the vendors should be considered.
There was also a suggestion that the community create some space where code that couldn't go into AOSP be collected. This might be a possibility, but it would be good to avoid the "
creating another fork to solve all the forks
" sort of solution.
One idea for the build system is to try to reduce the amount of
duplicative code in the device directories with something like
Kconfig. This would help express configuration dependencies, reducing the
number of options required to be specified, and ideally make it easier to
build for multiple devices with only a change to the configuration
file. Samuel Ortiz mentioned that Intel basically does this, though it
doesn't have the dependency tracking. It uses a configuration file to
define the device and some common infrastructure in the tree processes that
file. Stultz noted that many vendors have something like this to make it
easier to build multiple devices; it points to something that may need
to be
 shared generically.
Dmitry Shmidt of Google's Android team asked how Linaro handles doing
validation for devices it doesn't have access to. The answer was that it
doesn't, and it's a problem. However, another point was raised that the
Linux kernel deals with this all the time, since people don't have test
machines for all architectures, and it's handled by delegating testing
responsibility to architecture maintainers. It was noted that a perspective
from the Chrome OS folks might be useful, as they've been able to delegate
testing 
for a wider array of devices.
Rom Lemarchand from Google mentioned that he would like to see more
vendors submit code to AOSP. But some attendees said that it is
hard to get patches reviewed on Gerrit. A 
number of folks in the room agreed, saying they had run into similar problems.
The Google developers said that it sounded like maybe the auto-adding of
maintainers in Gerrit was broken. They promised to look into it and get it
solved quickly.
While Google controls commit access to AOSP, its
Gerrit
installation
allows anyone to review and comment on proposed changes. It was proposed
that a group of non-Google folks could make a pointed effort to review
patches submitted to Gerrit, which would help build up a better community
sense of code taste and might even lead to growing external
maintainers. Lemarchand mentioned that it would also be nice because it
would allow the Google
team 
to better understand whose reviews could be trusted in the community.
The discussion sort of dwindled at this point, so Stultz suggested moving on to the next talk.
Providing per-task quality of service
Next Juri Lelli from ARM talked (
slides
[PDF]
) about his work on the
energy-aware
scheduler
(EAS) and the potential for use of
deadline scheduling
in Android. He started
with an overview of the EAS, describing how its focus is on per-entity load
tracking and per-entity utilization tracking, which try to size up tasks so
that they can be properly placed on the right core in an asymmetric
multi-processing environment. The goal is to use as little energy as
possible while still getting good performance. When the system is not
over-utilized, the scheduler will try to pack tasks onto a single CPU, but
once a tipping point is crossed and that one CPU is overloaded, it falls
back to the conventional approach of spreading the load around.
He described how EAS ties more of the CPU-power logic like
dynamic voltage and frequency scaling
(DVFS)
together into the scheduler, by allowing the scheduler to trigger cpufreq
governors directly and make decisions about the speed of each CPU that is
being scheduled. This allows for the scheduler to ramp up a processor's
frequency to increase capacity if it wants to add a task to that CPU. He
also talked a little bit about
schedtune
, which provides a single sysfs
knob to boost performance on a global or per-cgroup basis.
At this point it was noted that most of the EAS discussion focused on
energy, while the interactive cpufreq governor in Android is mostly focused
on latency, so it was asked: how does latency come into the picture and how
can it be controlled? Lelli noted that the interactive cpufreq governor
tends to boost frequency quickly to provide interactive latency benefits to
the user. The schedtune sysfs knob allows for similar boosting, so when an
event occurs Android user space could provide some short-term boosting to
improve latency response. Riley Andrews from Google noted that the
interactive cpufreq governor gives this benefit without user space having
to do anything. Though Lelli pointed out that the governor does it a bit
blindly, so this allows a more informed and focused response that could
save power.
Andrews was also curious about all the various knobs that were available
via EAS. Lelli noted that the out-of-tree
HMP
scheduler
, used by some vendors for big.LITTLE machines,  had way too
many knobs and was very difficult to tune. So, with EAS, more of the logic
has been kept internal in the scheduler so it is easier to get it
right. Andrews also wondered about the heuristics for task placement. Lelli
noted that there are heuristics and the scheduler needs to make a guess and
try to compute the difference in energy used so it can try to give the best
tradeoff in performance and energy usage. It was suggested that for more
information, folks attend the EAS microconference session that would be
going on the next day.
Lelli then switched to the deadline
scheduler, which he has been maintaining with others. He mentioned some
of the benefits of
SCHED_DEADLINE
over other policies like
SCHED_FIFO
, like how it avoids starvation issues that
SCHED_FIFO
can have. It works using a resource-reservation system
that guarantees that a task will get a specific amount of CPU time in a
given period. The scheduler just needs to be provided the runtime, period,
and deadline values; then it will 
indicate if it can achieve those constraints or not.
He showed graphs of the performance implications of this model for tasks
like movie playback and wanted to know if folks were interested in using
this for Android. His thought was that SurfaceFlinger or AudioFlinger might
be able to use this policy. One question that came up was how does the
deadline scheduler's reservation system handle CPU frequency changes. Lelli
replied that it doesn't at the moment and that there needs to be some
integration of the policies, so that the deadline scheduler can specify a
minimum frequency in order to guarantee that the deadlines are met.
There was also some discussion on how it would interact with
SCHED_FIFO
tasks. It was clarified that
SCHED_DEADLINE
runs at a higher
priority than
SCHED_FIFO
, but
it can be used so that you can, for example, give a guaranteed limit of 10%
of runtime to SurfaceFlinger. That means you don't have to deal with starvation
issues, which had been
mentioned
as being a problem
in making the audio pipeline run as a
SCHED_FIFO
task at
Google I/O. Andrews said that he had looked
at it for SurfaceFlinger earlier, but had some issues with the interface
and the cpufreq issue was problematic as well.  There were a few more
questions, but it was suggested that they be brought up at the EAS
microconference the next day.
Improving big.LITTLE on Android
Todd Kjos (who was standing in for Tim Murray) from Google's Android
team then started reviewing the team's experience dealing with
big.LITTLE devices (
slides
[PDF]
). For the most part, big.LITTLE issues and the complex tuning
required have been left to the vendors to sort out, as Google hasn't
directly addressed it so far.  However, that's starting to change.  He
showed a few examples of the complexities of different styles of asymmetric
CPUs that they have seen, from more standard big.LITTLE pairings to more
complicated ones, where there might be different sets of "little" CPUs
running at different speeds, in addition to the "big" CPUs.
He showed some graphs of the power-performance curves for the different
CPUs, which may have cross-over points where it becomes obvious it's worth
jumping from the smaller CPUs to the bigger ones. However, he also showed
charts where there might be a gap between the two curves, making tuning
much more complicated, since to gain any performance at that gap, you have
to make a much bigger jump in power consumption.
He described some of the changes in Android M to help. Android keeps track of which tasks are foreground and which tasks are background tasks, so it now uses
cpusets
to help pin all background tasks to the small CPU or CPUs.
Bobby Batacharia from ARM asked  if all asynchronous tasks are
considered background tasks. Kjos and Andrews responded that not all are,
it depends on which tasks they're interacting or running with. Mark Gross
then asked how much work is done in background tasks. The Android
developers said not much, but it can be intermittent, though they didn't
have hard numbers.
Andrews then mentioned that the team really does want to better enforce
the notion of foreground and background tasks. Even when
background tasks are limited by cpusets and lower priorities, some still
cause scheduling interference with foreground 
tasks. Stultz asked if pushing foreground tasks to
SCHED_RR
(the
round-robin realtime scheduling class) would
solve this, but Andrews noted that the team was really avoiding making
tasks with non-deterministic runtimes run as round-robin.
Stultz then asked how the cpusets interacted with Android's use of
cgroups. Kjos clarified that they help together. Android still uses cgroups
to regulate task CPU usage, but the cpusets help
pin tasks to processors, so the tasks don't otherwise fan out to the big
CPUs. Batacharia noted that EAS should help with that problem.
As the session wrapped up, Kjos indicated that these types of systems will be an area of greater focus for his team in the coming year.
At that point, after over six hours, the microconference came to an end, and everyone quickly left for dinner and drinks.
[Thank you to all the presenters for their discussions, Karim Yaghmour for organizing and running the conference, and Rom Lemarchand for helping get so many of the Google Android team to attend.]
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Android
GuestArticles
Chan King Choy, Nathalie and John Stultz
GuestArticles
Stultz, John and Nathalie Chan King Choy
Conference
Linux Plumbers Conference/2015
to post comments