# Looking at a few recent kernel security holes [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 21, 2015 

The Linux kernel is the source of far more CVE numbers than any other component in the system; even wireshark doesn't really come close. To an extent, that is one of the hazards of kernel programming: errors that would simply be bugs in user space become vulnerabilities in the kernel realm. Still, there is always room to wonder if the kernel community could be doing better than it is in this regard. One way to try to answer such a question is to look at what types of vulnerabilities are being discovered to see what patterns emerge. Thus, this brief survey, which looks at a few recent issues. 

#### Buffer overflows and more

[CVE-2015-5156](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-5156) is, at its core, a buffer overflow in the [virtio](/Articles/239238/) network driver subsystem. This driver sets the `NETIF_F_FRAGLIST` flag on its devices, indicating that it can handle packets that have been split into multiple fragments. When it gets an actual packet, it calls `skb_to_sgvec()` to turn that list of fragments into a scatter/gather I/O list. Unfortunately, the size of the `scatterlist` array it allocates for the fragment list is insufficient; in some circumstances, there can be more fragments than can fit into the scatter/gather list. The result is that `skb_to_sgvec()` writes beyond the end of the list, corrupting a random range of memory. 

The problem was "fixed" by removing the `NETIF_F_FRAGLIST` flag. As a minimal fix for stable kernels, this change probably makes sense. But one could argue that fixing it properly would involve either (1) sizing the `scatterlist` array properly in virtio, or, better, (2) passing the length of the list to `skb_to_sgvec()` so it cannot be overrun. Without that latter fix, `skb_to_sgvec()` behaves much like `strcpy()`, and this type of overrun could easily happen again. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

[CVE-2015-2925](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-2925) is a vulnerability that allows a process to escape from a mount namespace if it can create a bind mount within that namespace. In practice, it means that processes can get out of a container and access the entire host-system filesystem. It was [reported](/Articles/661452/) in April and was the subject of a long series of discussions. The [proposed fixes](/Articles/661456/) were complex (to say the least) and ran into some opposition. In the end, a [simpler fix](http://git.kernel.org/linus/cde93be45a8a90d8c264c776fab63487b5038a65) was merged for 4.3. 

This bug came about because nobody thought about the effects that a `rename()` call outside of a bind mount might have on processes whose current working directory lies within that mount. In short, a process following "`..`" out of a directory is normally stopped at the root of the filesystem it is in, but, if a directory can be moved out of a bind mount, a process within that directory can move up without ever encountering that root; it will thus never be stopped. Intersections of security domains will often be fraught with this kind of problem. The issue is fixed, but it is hard to believe that there won't be others like it. 

[CVE-2015-5257](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-5257) is a null pointer dereference in the USB WhiteHEAT driver. These bugs can be used to cause a kernel oops; in some cases they can be exploited for privilege escalation, though most distributions should be configured to defeat such exploits. The source of the problem here is clear: the driver trusted the hardware to behave as expected. If somebody shows up with a purpose-built USB device, they can trigger the bug. 

This particular vulnerability has few people worried. But the vulnerability of the kernel to malicious hardware in general is worrisome indeed. Such hardware is increasingly easy to make, and it can often create conditions that developers have never thought about or tested for. We will almost certainly see more vulnerabilities of this nature. 

#### Initialization failures of various types

[CVE-2015-7613](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-7613) is a failure to properly initialize memory. In particular, the user and group IDs associated with a System V shared-memory object are not set before the object is exposed to the wider world, meaning that authentication checks can be done against random data. At a minimum, this bug can be exploited to gain access to shared-memory segments that should be inaccessible. But, as the [Red Hat bugzilla entry](https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1268270) notes: ""It is almost certain that this vulnerability can be used to gain arbitrary code execution in the kernel."" 

The good news here is that, in [KASan](/Articles/612153/), we have a tool that can detect use of uninitialized memory in the kernel. Indeed, it was KASan that flagged this particular problem. The not-so-good news is that, as Linus Torvalds noted in [the changelog to the fix](http://git.kernel.org/linus/b9a532277938798b53178d5a66af6e2915cb27cf), this problem had already been found and fixed in the System V semaphore code (for 3.18). It would have been good to fix all three types of System V IPC (message queues are vulnerable too), but, as Linus notes, ""we clearly forgot about msg and shm"". The lessons seem clear: tools are invaluable, but, as Al Viro once [said](/Articles/446631/): ""Bugs are like mushrooms - found one, look around for more."" 

Initialization-related race conditions are fairly common; another example can be seen in [CVE-2015-5283](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-5283). In a modular system, the module for the SCTP network protocol will not be loaded until a user requests an SCTP socket. The initialization code in the SCTP module registers its installed protocols before it is fully initialized; that opens a window within which another process can attempt to open sockets while the module is in a half-baked state. Good things rarely come from such situations. 

Almost any kernel module, be it a driver, a network protocol, or something else, must generally initialize a long list of resources and make them available to the rest of the system. It is easy to create a situation where some resources become visible before the module is fully prepared to manage them. An interrupt handler may be registered before the data structures the handler needs are ready. A sysfs file could show up before the driver is ready. Or an SCTP protocol can appear before the module is ready to handle it. These problems manifest themselves as difficult-to-find race conditions; they are hard to test for. So they will probably continue to pop up. 

[CVE-2015-5697](https://cve.mitre.org/cgi-bin/cvename.cgi?name=CVE-2015-5697) is an information-leak vulnerability. The MD (RAID) system implements an `ioctl()` operation called `GET_BITMAP_FILE`, which returns the name of the external bitmap file associated with a specific device. Should that device not actually have an external bitmap file, though, the `ioctl()` will copy 4096 bytes of uninitialized kernel memory to user space after having set just the first byte to zero. The remaining 4095 bytes could contain pretty much anything. An attacker could scan this data for specific patterns and possibly obtain kernel addresses or private data. 

The [fix](https://git.kernel.org/linus/b6878d9e03043695dbf3fa1caa6dfc09db225b16) is straightforward enough: allocate the space for the file name with `kzalloc()` instead of `kmalloc()`. But, once again, this is an easy sort of error to make; it is hard to ensure that all data copied to user space is initialized in all paths through the code. There has been a push over the years to use functions like `kzalloc()` everywhere, but there is resistance to doing so, especially in hot-path code where the developer is certain that the memory will be properly initialized. In any case, the `GET_BITMAP_FILE` `ioctl()` is not one of those hot paths, so there is no reason not to be sure in this case. 

These examples were all taken from vulnerabilities that were fixed in distributor updates over the last month or so. Needless to say, it is not an exhaustive list. But it does show a few of the numerous ways in which security-related bugs can be introduced into the kernel. Kernel programming requires great care, an extreme distrust of the environment in which the code is running, and, whenever possible, good testing tools. The kernel community has gotten better with all of these over the years, but there is clearly a lot of ground to be covered still.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Vulnerabilities](/Kernel/Index#Security-Vulnerabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
