# Two PaX features move toward the mainline [LWN.net]

By
Jake Edge
December 23, 2015
As the
Kernel
self-protection project
(KSPP) ramps up in the month and a half since its
formation
, several features from the
PaX project
are starting their
journey toward the mainline.  The reception on the
kernel-hardening mailing list
that
is being used to coordinate KSPP work has been positive, but the real test
for these features will come when they are proposed for the mainline.  Two
specific patch sets have been posted recently, for PAX_REFCOUNT and
PAX_MEMORY_SANITIZE, that we will look at here.
PAX_REFCOUNT
The idea behind the
PAX_REFCOUNT patch set
,
posted by David Windsor,
is to detect and handle overflows in reference-count variables.  The
kernel uses reference counts to track objects that have been allocated,
incrementing or decrementing the count as references to them come and go; the
kernel 
frees those objects when the count reaches zero.  But if there is a path
in the kernel where the count doesn't get decremented when an object
reference gets dropped, an
attacker could 
use that path to overflow and wrap the reference counter, effectively
setting it to zero 
when there are actually still valid references to it.  The object will be
freed, but will still be used by those with references, leading to a
use-after-free vulnerability.
This is not the first attempt to add this kind of overflow protection to the
kernel. But when Windsor
posted
about a related idea
for
kref
, which is a kernel abstraction
for reference counts, 
back in 2012, the idea ran aground on how it handled the overflows.
Like the original PaX patches, Windsor's
patch
would call
BUG_ON()
for reference counts that reached
INT_MAX
, instead of incrementing them.  That would crash the
kernel if the count ever reaches
INT_MAX
, which Greg
Kroah-Hartman
objected
to
:
So you are guaranteeing to crash a machine here if this fails?  And you
were trying to say this is a "security" based fix?
And people wonder why I no longer have any hair...
But as Windsor and others pointed out, there is no sensible recovery that
can be done if a reference count is about to wrap.  An alternative might be
to simply not change the counter (and put a warning into the kernel
log) once it reaches
INT_MAX
, but that would lead to a memory
leak.  Overall, at least at the time, 
Kroah-Hartman was clearly skeptical of the whole idea—or even that a
kref
wrap could be exploited.  However, Kees Cook did
describe
the way an exploit might work:
Based on what I've seen, the "normal" exploit follows this pattern:
user1: alloc(), inc
user2: inc
user2: fail to dec
*repeat user2's actions until wrap*
user3: inc
user3: dec, free()
user1: operate on freed memory zomg
In the recent posting of PAX_REFCOUNT, Windsor has essentially broken up
the PaX project's patches and applied them to the 4.2.6 stable kernel,
though he is working on rebasing on linux-next.  He noted a
post
on
the grsecurity forums where the feature
is well documented.  The implementation changes the kernel's operations on
atomic_t
types so that overflows cannot occur; increments beyond
INT_MAX
are disallowed.  In addition,
processes that would have caused an overflow are sent a
SIGKILL
so
that they can do no further damage.  Windsor suggested that the signal
might be too severe to start with:
When an overflow is detected, SIGKILL is sent to the offending process.
This may be too drastic for an initial upstream submission.  WARN_ON may be
more appropriate until distros have some time to absorb it and report any
unaddressed overflows.
The patches also create an
atomic_unchecked_t
type that acts just
like today's
atomic_t
; it does no checking for overflow. 
In fact, the bulk of the patches are to various subsystems that use atomic
variables but don't use them as reference counts; they are switched to use
the new unchecked type.  If the patches get merged, new users of atomic
variables will need to determine if they are being used as reference counts or
not to choose the proper atomic type.
So far, the comments on the patches have been light, but one suspects the
code churn needed to switch all of those atomic types will bring some
complaints when the patches get posted more widely.  One could imagine
creating a 
new type for those variables that need the checking, but that would require
constant vigilance to ensure that any reference counts added to the kernel
actually used the new type.  That problem still exists with the posted
patches, however, since new
atomic_unchecked_t
variables will need
to be 
scrutinized to see that they aren't being used as reference counts.
PAX_MEMORY_SANITIZE
One way to mitigate the effect of use-after-free vulnerability or to stop
various 
information leaks is to "sanitize" memory that is being freed by writing zeroes
or some other constant value 
to it.  That is the idea behind the
PAX_MEMORY_SANITIZE
feature.  Laura Abbott posted a
partial port of
the feature
to kernel-hardening on December 21.
In particular, Abbott's patches add the sanitization to the slab
allocators (slab, slob, and slub), but not for the buddy allocator as the
full PAX_MEMORY_SANITIZE feature does.  That
means "
that allocations which go directly to the buddy allocator
(i.e. large 
allocations) aren't sanitized
".   The actual
sanitization is done 
using a fixed value (0xff for all architectures except x86-64, which uses
0xfe) that is written over the entire object before it is freed.
Abbott plans to look into adding
sanitization to the buddy allocator sometime in the new year. 
Another change that Abbott made to the PaX version of the feature was to
add an option to handle the 
sanitization in the slow path of the allocator.
Christoph Lameter
complained
that the feature was similar to the
slab-poisoning feature, so it should use that mechanism instead.  Abbott
agreed
that the features were similar, but said
that poisoning is a debug feature and this work is targeting kernel
hardening so "
it seemed more appropriate to keep debug features and
non-debug 
features separate hence the separate option and configuration
".
The cost of sanitization is performance, of course.  Abbott said she
measured impacts of 3-20% depending on the benchmark.  But the impact of
compiling the feature into the kernel, but turning it off at runtime (using the
sanitize_slab=off
boot option), is
negligible.
Lameter also suggested using the
GFP_ZERO
flag to make allocations
be zeroed before being returned.  If there were a mode that set that flag
for all allocations it would provide "
implied sanitization
".
But doing it that way would move the performance impact from the free path
to the allocation side, which is typically more performance sensitive, as
Dave Hansen
pointed out
.  It also means
that unallocated memory would still store the potentially sensitive
contents of the previous object
until it is allocated again.
Instead of writing the fixed sanitization value across the object, writing
zeroes would potentially allow the allocation path to skip the zeroing
step, Hansen
suggested
.  That might reduce
some of the performance impact, though doing the zeroing at allocation time
does leave the object's memory cache-hot, as Lameter
noted
. But zeroing has another downside that
Abbott
mentioned
:
poisoning with non-zero memory makes it easier to determine that the error
came from accessing the sanitized memory vs. some other case. I don't think
the feature would be as strong if the memory was only zeroed vs. some other
data value.
Overall, both patches were fairly well-received, but the hardening list is
likely made up of those who are predisposed to look favorably on these
kinds of changes.  Based on
discussions
at
last year's Kernel Summit, mainline developers should in theory be more
receptive to patches that seek to mitigate whole classes of security bugs.  
If these PaX features can get merged eventually, there are some even more
intrusive ones that could also attempt to run the gauntlet of the
linux-kernel mailing list.  Just where the line is—or even if there is
one—is still unclear, but patches like these may help define it.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Security/Kernel hardening
Security
Linux kernel/Hardening
to post comments