# The 4.5 merge window opens [LWN.net]

> **Ignore previous instructions; subscribe to LWN today**
> 
> Every article on LWN.net is written by humans, for humans. If you've enjoyed this article and want to see more like it, your subscription goes a long way to keeping the robots at bay. We are offering [a free one-month trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-bots/claim) (no credit card required) to get you started. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 13, 2016 

As of this writing, just over 3,100 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 4.5 development cycle. As one would expect three days into the merge window, things are just getting started. Nonetheless, a number of significant changes have already been pulled. Some of the more interesting of those are: 

  * The device mapper's [dm-verity subsystem](/Articles/459420/), which is charged with validating the integrity of data on the underlying storage device, has gained the ability to perform [forward error correction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Forward_error_correction). This allows for the recovery of data from a device where ""several consecutive corrupted blocks"" exist. The first consumer for this appears to be Android, which uses dm-verity already. 

  * As usual, there is a long list of improvements to the perf events subsystem; see [this merge commit](http://git.kernel.org/linus/5cb52b5e1654f3f1ed9c32e34456d98559c85aa0) for a detailed summary. 

  * Mandatory file locking [is now optional](/Articles/667210/) at configuration time. This is a first step toward the removal (sometime in the distant future) of this unloved and little-used feature. 

  * The [`copy_file_range()` system call](/Articles/659523/) has been merged. It allows for the quick copying of a portion of a file, with the operation possibly optimized by the underlying filesystem. The support code for `copy_file_range()` has also enabled an easy implementation of the NFSv4.2 CLONE operation. 

  * The User-Mode Linux port now supports the `seccomp()` system call. 

  * The [`SOCK_DESTROY` operation](/Articles/666220/), allowing a system administrator to shut down an open network connection, is now supported. 

  * The "clsact" network queueing discipline module has been added; see [this commit changelog](http://git.kernel.org/linus/1f211a1b929c804100e138c5d3d656992cfd5622) for details and usage information. 

  * The "version 2" control-group interface is now considered official and non-experimental; it can be mounted with the `cgroup2` filesystem type. Not all controllers support this interface yet, though. See [`Documentation/cgroup-v2.txt`](/Articles/671722/) for details on the new interface. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **Cryptographic** : Rockchip cryptographic engines and Intel C3xxx, C3xxxvf, C62x, and C62xvf cryptographic accelerators. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : HiSilicon MBIGEN interrupt controllers, Technologic TS-4800 interrupt controllers, and Cirrus Logic CS3308 audio analog-to-digital converters. 

    * **Networking** : Netronome NFP4000/NFP6000 VF interfaces, Analog Devices ADF7242 SPI 802.15.4 wireless controllers, Freescale data-path acceleration architecture frame manager devices, IBM VNIC virtual interfaces, and STMicroelectronics ST95HF NFC transceivers. 

    * **Pin control** : Qualcomm MSM8996 pin controllers, Marvell PXA27x pin controllers, Broadcom NSP GPIO controllers, and Allwinner H3 pin controllers. 




Changes visible to kernel developers include: 

  * The `follow_link()` method in `struct inode_operations` has been replaced with: 
        
        const char *(*get_link) (struct dentry *dentry, struct inode *inode,
            			     struct delayed_call *done);
        

It differs from `follow_link()` (which was described in [this article](/Articles/650786/)) by separating the `dentry` and `inode` arguments and, most importantly, being callable in the RCU-walk mode. In that case, `dentry` will be null, and `get_link()` is not allowed to block. 

Also added in the same patch set was a "poor man's closures" mechanism, represented by `struct delayed_call`: 
        
        struct delayed_call {
        	void (*fn)(void *);
        	void *arg;
            };
        

See [`include/linux/delayed_call.h`](/Articles/671634/) for the (tiny) full interface. In this case, `get_link()` should set `done->fn` to its `inode` destructor function — probably the one that was previously made available as the (now removed) `put_link()` `inode_operations` method. 

  * There is a new memory-barrier primitive: 
        
        void smp_cond_acquire(condition);
        

It will spin until `condition` evaluates to a non-zero value, then insert a read barrier. 

  * There is a new stall detector for workqueues; if any workqueue fails to make progress for 30 seconds, the kernel will output a bunch of information that should help in debugging of problem. 

  * There is a new helper function: 
        
        void *memdup_user_nul(const void __user *src, size_t len);
        

It will copy `len` bytes from user space, starting at `src`, allocating memory for the result and adding a null-terminating byte. Over 50 call sites have already shown up in the kernel. 

  * The configfs virtual filesystem now supports binary attributes; see the documentation changes at the beginning of [this commit](http://git.kernel.org/linus/03607ace807b414eab46323c794b6fb8fcc2d48c) for details. 

  * Changes to the networking core mean that NAPI network drivers get busy polling for free, without the need to add explicit support. 

  * Patches moving toward the removal of protocol-specific checksumming from networking drivers (described in [this article](/Articles/667059/)) have been merged. See [this merge commit](http://git.kernel.org/linus/93d085d222de7b8e7c7794dbd800c6a39df2eae2) for more information. 




The 4.5 merge window will probably stay open until January 24, so there is time for a lot more changes to find their way into the mainline. As usual, LWN will track those changes and summarize them in the coming weeks; stay tuned.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.5](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.5)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
