# 4.5 merge window part 3 [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 25, 2016 

As expected, Linus [released](/Articles/673338/) the 4.5-rc1 development kernel and closed the merge window for this cycle on January 24. Less than 2,000 changes were pulled since [last week's summary](/Articles/672344/), but there were some significant changes to be found among them. Some of the more interesting changes include: 

  * A new tool called UBSAN checks a running kernel for various types of undefined behavior that can lead to obscure bugs; [the commit changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/c6d308534aef6c99904bf5862066360ae067abc4) contains a list of bugs that have already been found by UBSAN and fixed. See [Documentation/ubsan.txt](/Articles/673317/) for an introduction to this tool. 

  * The new `CONFIG_IO_STRICT_DEVMEM` option, which blocks access to memory (via `/dev/mem`) claimed by device drivers, turned out to break booting on some systems, so it is now off by default. 

  * The ARM multiplatform work, which aims to build a single ARM kernel that can boot on a wide variety of processors, has reached an important milestone with the [merging](https://git.kernel.org/linus/6b5a12dbca7a8681ecb78dbebaedc1f8364ebd10) of work to bring a number of minor platforms into the fold. 

This branch is the culmination of 5 years of effort to bring the ARMv6 and ARMv7 platforms together such that they can all be enabled and boot the same kernel. It has been a tremendous amount of cleanup and refactoring by a huge number of people, and creation of several new (and major) subsystems to better abstract out all the platform details in an appropriate manner. 

  * The filesystems in user space (FUSE) subsystem has added support for the `SEEK_HOLE` and `SEEK_DATA` options to the `lseek()` system call. 

  * The `epoll_ctl()` system call supports a new flag, `EPOLLEXCLUSIVE`, that causes `epoll_wait()` to only wake one process when a file descriptor becomes ready. See [this article](/Articles/633422/#excl) for a description of this option and the use case for it. 

  * Direct-access ("DAX") mappings now work properly with the `msync()` and `fsync()` system calls. 

  * The ext4 filesystem has gained "project quota" support, wherein dispersed files can be assigned to the same "project" and given their own quota. The feature is rigorously undocumented, but some information be found in the header of [this patch posting](/Articles/623835/). 

  * The implementation of the XFS `XFS_IOC_FSSETXATTR` and `XFS_IOC_FSGETXATTR` `ioctl()` commands has been moved up to the virtual filesystem level, and an implementation for the ext4 filesystem has been added. This operation, also severely undocumented, allows the querying (and setting) of various file attributes, including immutability, whether writes should always be synchronous, exclusion from backups, and more. See the defines near the top of [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/334e580a6f97e2e84d1c19a8679603956acaa622) for the list of supported attributes. 

  * The Ceph filesystem now has support for asynchronous I/O. 

  * New hardware support includes: 

    * **Systems and processors** : Renesas R-Car H3 systems, Ralink MT7621 processors, Microchip PIC32MZDA processors, Socionext UniPhier systems, and NVIDIA Tegra132 processors. 

    * **Miscellaneous** : Qualcomm "shared memory state machine" controllers, Qualcomm wireless connectivity subsystem controllers, Qualcomm PCIe controllers, TI AMx3 Wkup-M3 inter-processor communication subsystems, Raspberry Pi power domain controllers, TI OMAP dual-mode timers, HiSilicon Hip06 PCIe host controllers, Intel "volume management device" PCI host bridges, and AMD "non-transparent bridge" performance-monitoring hardware. 




Finally, back in December, Linus [noticed](/Articles/673320/) that the user-space access utilities (`get_user()` and friends) were showing up heavily on some profiles, especially on systems where [supervisor-mode access prevention](/Articles/517475/) is in use. The problem is that, often, the kernel needs to perform several accesses in a sequence, with the result that access prevention is turned off and back on numerous times. 

The solution, as is so often the case, is batching: turn off access prevention once, do all the work, then turn it back on. To support this mode of access, Linus has introduced a new set of macros: 
    
    
        user_access_begin();
        unsafe_put_user(value, user_space_pointer);
        unsafe_get_user(value, user_space_pointer);
        user_access_end();
    

As he puts it in the comments, the "unsafe" functions are not actually unsafe if they are used correctly, but developers must pay attention. The `unsafe_put_user()` and `unsafe_get_user()` macros can only be used after a `user_access_begin()` call is made, and the usual `access_ok()` checks must be done first. The [first use](https://git.kernel.org/linus/9fd4470ff4974c41b1db43c3b355b9085af9c12a) of these functions is in the user-space string-manipulation functions. Only x86 is supported in 4.5, but support for other architectures should be forthcoming. 

At the close of the merge window, 10,305 non-merge changesets had been pulled into the mainline repository. That suggests that 4.5 will be a relatively slow development cycle with regard to the number of changes merged. Much of that "slowness" can be attributed to a relatively small merge from the staging tree this time around; otherwise, the kernel developers appear to be working at full speed. 

If the usual 63-day cycle holds, the release of the final 4.5 kernel can be expected to happen on March 13. Between now and then, though, there are certainly numerous bugs to be found and fixed.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.5](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.5)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
