# Improving EXPORT_SYMBOL() [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
February 3, 2016
The kernel's
EXPORT_SYMBOL()
directive is used to make kernel
symbols (functions and data structures) available to loadable modules; only
the symbols that have been explicitly exported can by used by modules.
This directive is a simple macro that has, since the beginning, had a
couple of annoying limitations, but nobody has ever gotten around to fixing
them until now.  Al Viro's
patch set
is a
good opportunity to look at symbol exports and how they work.
The actual implementation of
EXPORT_SYMBOL()
can be found in
include/linux/export.h
.
Whenever this macro is invoked, it declares a
kernel_symbol
structure for the exported symbol:
struct kernel_symbol
    {
	unsigned long value;
	const char *name;
    };
As one might expect, the
name
field is set to the name of the
symbol, while
value
becomes its address.  When the code is
compiled, though, this structure is not placed with the rest of the
surrounding object code; instead, it goes into a special ELF section called
__ksymtab
(or
__ksymtab_gpl
for GPL-only symbols).
The kernel binary contains these sections; any module that exports symbols
of its own can also have them.
When the kernel boots (or a module that exports symbols
is loaded), that section is read and the symbol table is populated from the
structures found there.  The symbol table can then be used to satisfy
references from modules to exported symbols.
In theory, the symbol-export mechanism limits the API available to loadable
modules.  There was once hope that this API could be kept to a relatively
small and well-defined set.  A quick grep in the kernel repository reveals,
though, that there are currently over 27,000 exported symbols — not exactly
a small set.  When you have that many symbols, simply maintaining them all
becomes a bit of a challenge.
One rule of thumb meant to help with the maintenance of exported symbols is
that the actual
EXPORT_SYMBOL()
directive should appear next to
the function or data structure that it exports.  That allows the function
and its export declaration to be modified together.  This rule is not
always observed, though.  Sometimes it's just a matter of old code that
predates the adoption of this rule but, more often, it is actually the
result of a couple of limitations in the export mechanism:
The macros found in
<linux/export.h>
are written in C
     and use GCC-specific 
     extensions; they do not work in assembly-language code.  So the export
     declarations for any functions written in assembly must appear in a
     separate, C-language file.
Code that is built into a separate library prior to being linked into
     the kernel image has a potential surprise of its own.  If nothing that
     is built into the main kernel image uses the exported object, the
     linker will leave it out of the build.  Later, when a module is loaded
     needing that symbol, the load will fail because that symbol is not
     actually present.  One way to work around this problem is to put the
     export declaration in code that's known to be built in — away from the
     object actually being exported.
Addressing these limitations is the goal of Al's patch set.  Fixing the
first one is relatively easy; it is mostly just a matter of writing a
version of
<linux/export.h>
that uses the necessary assembler
directives to create the
kernel_symbol
structures in the proper
section.  There are some details related to alignment requirements on some
architectures, but they do not appear to have been that hard to get
around.  Once Al's patches are applied, assembly code can include
<asm/export.h>
and use
EXPORT_SYMBOL()
in the usual
way.
The solution to the second problem is a bit of scripting trickery.  As part
of the build process,
objdump
is run on any library objects to
obtain a list of exported symbols.  A dummy object file (
lib-ksyms.o
)
is then created with an explicit reference to each exported symbol; that
object file is linked directly into the kernel.  That will cause the linker
to pull in all of the exported functions as well, ensuring that they will
be available later on when a module is loaded.  That eliminates an annoying
trap that can spring on unsuspecting users years in the future when they
happen on a configuration that fails to pull in objects they will need.
The bulk of the patch set is a set of cleanups enabled by the above
changes; in particular, a lot of
EXPORT_SYMBOL()
and
EXPORT_SYMBOL_GPL()
declarations are moved into assembly code next
to the objects they are exporting.  In the process, Al found a number of
dusty corners where unused functions could be removed; as he put it:
"
I'm fairly sure that more junk like that is out there; that's one of
the reasons why exports really ought to be near the definitions.
"
Not all of those cleanups need to be merged anytime soon, though; they can
happen anytime after the enabling patches go into the mainline.  So that
part of the patch set will likely be left in the hands of the specific
architecture maintainers (assembly-language code, by its nature, is found
in the architecture-specific parts of the kernel tree).  The core changes
are straightforward and uncontroversial; there is unlikely to be much
keeping them out of the mainline.  So, in the near future, one longstanding
build-system annoyance should be history.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Modules/Exported symbols
to post comments