# Some 4.5 Development statistics [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 9, 2016 

When Linus released the [4.5-rc7](/Articles/679052/) prepatch, he indicated that it would probably be the last one prior to the official 4.5 release. That means we're running a bit late for the traditional article full of statistics for this development cycle. So, without further ado, here is a look at the changes that came in during the 4.5 cycle and where they came from. 

As of this writing, just over 12,000 non-merge changesets have landed in the mainline repository for 4.5. That makes 4.5 one of the quieter development cycles in the last year; less than 4.2 and 4.4 (both over 13,000 changesets) but approximately equal to 4.1 and 4.3. All things are relative, of course; not that long ago, 12,000 changes would have been one of the busiest cycles. Even when the kernel community slows down a bit, there is a lot going on. 

These changes were contributed by 1,528 developers — short of the 1,575 seen in 4.4 or the 1,625 in 4.3, but, once again, a fair crowd of contributors. The most active of these developers were: 

> Most active 4.5 developers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> Linus Walleij| 236| 2.0%  
> Arnd Bergmann| 226| 1.9%  
> Leo Kim| 210| 1.7%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 169| 1.4%  
> Geert Uytterhoeven| 159| 1.3%  
> Ville Syrjälä| 126| 1.0%  
> Kuninori Morimoto| 112| 0.9%  
> Takashi Iwai| 108| 0.9%  
> Jiri Olsa| 104| 0.9%  
> Christoph Hellwig| 102| 0.8%  
> Julia Lawall| 101| 0.8%  
> Glen Lee| 101| 0.8%  
> Javier Martinez Canillas| 89| 0.7%  
> Geliang Tang| 89| 0.7%  
> Dan Carpenter| 85| 0.7%  
> Daniel Vetter| 81| 0.7%  
> Boris Brezillon| 80| 0.7%  
> Alex Deucher| 80| 0.7%  
> Kirill A. Shutemov| 77| 0.6%  
> Thierry Reding| 74| 0.6%  
> | By changed lines  
> ---  
> Doug Ledford| 53086| 7.7%  
> Tomi Valkeinen| 36631| 5.3%  
> Eric Huang| 22714| 3.3%  
> Alex Deucher| 16604| 2.4%  
> yanyang1| 11129| 1.6%  
> Igal Liberman| 10569| 1.5%  
> Thierry Reding| 9842| 1.4%  
> Bard Liao| 9762| 1.4%  
> Christoph Hellwig| 9680| 1.4%  
> Arnd Bergmann| 9233| 1.3%  
> Geert Uytterhoeven| 8325| 1.2%  
> Stephen Boyd| 8183| 1.2%  
> Paul E. McKenney| 7485| 1.1%  
> Rex Zhu| 7382| 1.1%  
> The etnaviv authors| 7238| 1.1%  
> Jammy Zhou| 7175| 1.0%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 6473| 0.9%  
> Eric Anholt| 6234| 0.9%  
> Maruthi Srinivas Bayyavarapu| 5239| 0.8%  
> Adam Thomson| 5153| 0.7%  
  
Linus Walleij topped the by-changesets list with a lot of low-level work, mostly near the GPIO subsystem and drivers that use it. Arnd Bergmann works all over the tree, mostly dealing with build problems and improving ARM multiplatform support. Leo Kim worked exclusively on cleaning up the wilc1000 driver in the staging tree, Mauro Carvalho Chehab made many improvements as the maintainer of the media subsystem, and Geert Uytterhoeven did a lot of work in the ARM and related driver subsystems. 

In many development cycles, this list has been dominated by developers working in the staging subsystem, but 4.5 is an exception: only two of the developers in the by-changesets column had any significant work in the staging tree at all. Both of them, as it turns out, were working on the wilc1000 driver. 

In the lines-changed column, longtime contributor Doug Ledford got to the top with three changesets removing three unloved staging drivers, deleting 53,000 lines of code. Tomi Valkeinen did a lot of work with the TI OMAP subarchitecture, while Eric Huang, Alex Deucher, and "yanyang1" all added functionality to the AMD graphics drivers. Further down that list, "the etnaviv authors" is an alias that was used for a single patch adding the [Etnaviv](https://github.com/etnaviv) graphics driver; it represents the work of Christian Gmeiner, Russell King, and Lucas Stach. 

Work on the 4.5 kernel was supported by just over 200 companies that we could identify — a typical number. The employers supporting the most work this time were: 

> Most active 4.5 employers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> Intel| 1734| 14.4%  
> (Unknown)| 975| 8.1%  
> Red Hat| 732| 6.1%  
> Linaro| 723| 6.0%  
> (None)| 628| 5.2%  
> Samsung| 513| 4.3%  
> SUSE| 382| 3.2%  
> Atmel| 380| 3.2%  
> Renesas Electronics| 360| 3.0%  
> IBM| 346| 2.9%  
> AMD| 283| 2.4%  
> Mellanox| 275| 2.3%  
> (Consultant)| 245| 2.0%  
> Broadcom| 208| 1.7%  
> Oracle| 179| 1.5%  
> Google| 160| 1.3%  
> Texas Instruments| 152| 1.3%  
> Huawei Technologies| 141| 1.2%  
> NVidia| 137| 1.1%  
> ARM| 127| 1.1%  
> | By lines changed  
> ---  
> Red Hat| 83657| 12.1%  
> Intel| 80160| 11.6%  
> AMD| 74673| 10.8%  
> Texas Instruments| 41808| 6.1%  
> (Unknown)| 27958| 4.1%  
> IBM| 25433| 3.7%  
> Linaro| 22198| 3.2%  
> (None)| 21929| 3.2%  
> Mellanox| 19558| 2.8%  
> Samsung| 19190| 2.8%  
> Renesas Electronics| 17964| 2.6%  
> (Consultant)| 15593| 2.3%  
> NVidia| 15038| 2.2%  
> Freescale| 13964| 2.0%  
> Code Aurora Forum| 13514| 2.0%  
> Atmel| 10845| 1.6%  
> Realtek| 10090| 1.5%  
> Rockchip| 9735| 1.4%  
> Huawei Technologies| 7992| 1.2%  
> Broadcom| 7930| 1.2%  
  
Intel is, by now, the dominant contributor; it would have been at the top of both lists except for the aforementioned drivers removed by Doug Ledford. Red Hat, which once reliably sat at the top of the list, may soon be overshadowed by companies working in the mobile and embedded space. In general, though, this table looks much like it has for some time. 

If we look at non-author signoffs — the addition of Signed-off-by tags to patches by developers other than the author — the story looks just a little different: 

> Most non-author signoffs in 4.5  
> ---  
> | Developers  
> ---  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 1009| 9.0%  
> David S. Miller| 950| 8.5%  
> Mark Brown| 585| 5.2%  
> Andrew Morton| 451| 4.0%  
> Martin K. Petersen| 264| 2.4%  
> Arnaldo Carvalho de Melo| 263| 2.3%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 235| 2.1%  
> Glen Lee| 210| 1.9%  
> Rafael J. Wysocki| 205| 1.8%  
> Kalle Valo| 193| 1.7%  
> | Companies  
> ---  
> Red Hat| 1981| 17.8%  
> Intel| 1459| 13.1%  
> Linux Foundation| 1029| 9.2%  
> Linaro| 1003| 9.0%  
> Google| 632| 5.7%  
> Samsung| 447| 4.0%  
> (None)| 361| 3.2%  
> Oracle| 295| 2.7%  
> IBM| 288| 2.6%  
> SUSE| 265| 2.4%  
  
To a first approximation, this table represents the most active subsystem maintainers — the developers who make the decision to accept any given patch. While the more traditional, enterprise-oriented companies remain at the top of this list, the curve has been flattening over time as more companies take responsibility for the maintenance of parts of the kernel. 

Finally, it has been a while since we looked at what the most active companies are most interested in. That is a simple matter of picking out the patches contributed by a given company's developers and noting which files were touched. So, for example, here is where Intel works: 

> Intel  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem | Notes  
> 67%| `drivers/` | 29% `gpu`, 15% `net`, 5% `staging`  
> 12%| `include/`|   
> 9%| `sound/`|   
> 5%| `net/`|   
> 5%| `arch/` | 3.3% `x86`  
> 4%| `kernel/`|   
> 4%| `mm/`|   
  
Intel, clearly, is focused on drivers for its hardware and CPUs, as one might expect. The picture for Red Hat is a bit different: 

> Red Hat  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem | Notes  
> 29%| `drivers/`|  6% `gpu`, 5% `net`, 3% `tty`  
> 22%| `tools/`| 19% `perf`  
> 17%| `fs/`|  4% `xfs`, 3% `nfs`, 3% `gfs2`, 2% `namei.c`, 1% `btrfs`, 1% `ceph`, 1% `f2fs`, 1% `ext4`  
> 14%| `include/`|   
> 13%| `arch/` | 4% `x86`, 2% `arm`, 2% `s390`, 1% `powerpc`, 1% `sparc`  
> 7%| `kernel/`|   
> 5%| `net/`|   
> 3%| `crypto/`|   
  
Red Hat's contribution to the `tools` directory (and the `perf` tool in particular) has increased over the years, but the company still works all over the kernel, putting a significant part of its effort into the core kernel code. 

What about Linaro, which has been increasing its contributions over the years? 

> Linaro  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem | Notes  
> 66%| `drivers/`|  17% `gpio`, 7% `clocksource`, 7% `pinctrl`, 4% `mfd`, 4% `staging`, 4% `net`  
> 25%| `arch/` | 19% `arm`, 4% `arm64`, 1% `mips`  
> 6%| `include/`|   
> 3%| `sound/`|   
> 3%| `Documentation/`|   
  
Linaro is all about hardware enablement, and its work shows that. Even the work in the documentation directory is aimed that way: almost all of it happened in the `devicetree` subdirectory. (Lest anybody worry that the numbers add up to over 100%, remember that many patches touch more than one subdirectory, and are thus counted more than once). 

Many of the other companies on the list have similar patterns; they tend to be interested in support for their own hardware, so that is where their work is done. Something slightly different can be seen if one skips down the list and looks at Google, though: 

> Google  
> ---  
> %| Subsystem | Notes  
> 29%| `drivers/`|  9% `net`, 8% `input`, 5% `usb`, 4% `md`, 3% `pci`  
> 31%| `net/` | 15% `ipv4`, 9% `core`, 8% `ipv6`  
> 17%| `include/`|   
> 15%| `arch/` | 10% `x86`, 3% `powerpc`, 2% `arm`, 2% `arm64`  
> 6%| `fs/` | 3% `ext4`  
  
Many of the improvements to the networking subsystem have, in recent years, come from Google; the numbers here show that Google is still interested in making Linux networking better. 

All of this activity is the result of around 200 companies and numerous individuals, all working in pursuit of their own interests without any sort of overall control. As one might expect, the outcome can be a bit patchy at times; less energy goes into areas like documentation and security than one might like. But we still get a quickly evolving, highly capable kernel out of it, and that doesn't look like it will change anytime soon.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.5](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.5)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
