# Memory-management testing [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
April 27, 2016 

* * *

[LSFMM 2016](/Articles/lsfmm2016/)

Memory-management subsystem testing is notoriously difficult; mistakes in the code often make themselves felt far from the place where things actually went wrong. Things are being done to improve testing in the kernel, though; Sasha Levin led a session at the 2016 Linux Storage, Filesystem, and Memory-Management Summit to discuss what has been done and how memory-management testing can be improved. 

Sasha started by saying that he has been working with the [KASan](/Articles/612153/) memory-error detection tool in an attempt to find places where the necessary locks are not being taken. But, to get there, he needs to be able to annotate which memory is protected by each lock, and he is not sure how to proceed. Adding that information inline, or in `spin_lock_init()`, doesn't seem like the best solution. Christoph Lameter suggested that the locking requirements could be put into the relevant structure definitions, but that could get messy; there were concerns about what that would do to the already convoluted [`struct page`](/Articles/565097/), for example. 

The discussion moved on to `VM_BUG_ON()` calls, which cause an oops when an assertion finds something wrong. A lot of these, he said, could be relocated to, for example, where page flags are written. That would catch problems at the source, rather than tripping over them at some later point. The problem with that approach might be the performance cost, since it would be adding checks at every write to the page flags. Kirill Shutemov also worried about potential false positives; if flags are changed [![\[Sasha Levin\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/conf/2016/lsfmm/SashaLevin-sm.jpg)](/Articles/684925/) in multiple steps, they could appear to be in an incorrect state between those steps. Hugh Dickins agreed that there would be a lot of noise resulting from such a change, and said that nobody would bother to try to fix it all. 

One possible improvement might be to validate the page flags only when a page is unlocked. Sasha said he would put a proposal together and see what sort of response he gets. 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

He is also trying to improve testing of the handling of huge pages. To that end, he has written a patch to expose the list of huge pages to debugfs; that allows him to force page splits at inconvenient times to see what happens. He plans to clean that patch up and submit it soon. 

The final topic of discussion was kernel trees for testing. Sasha said that Andrew Morton's "mmotm" tree contains changes that are thought to be suitable for the next merge window, but that is only so helpful to get testing for large memory-management patch sets, which often go through several iterations before reaching that point. So he is thinking about running a testing tree of his own containing patches from "known authors," in the hope of catching problems earlier. Would that be useful, he asked, and would others make use of it? 

Andrew responded that it's often more useful if one person provides the testing service, rather than putting out a tree in the hope that others will test it. But he might consider pulling it into mmotm. Hugh worried, though, that doing so might destabilize the mmotm tree. Sasha responded that such destabilization was exactly the purpose — it would help to bring out problems early. But whether such destabilization would be welcome for mmotm users in general is not clear.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development tools/Testing](/Kernel/Index#Development_tools-Testing)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Storage, Filesystem, and Memory-Management Summit/2016](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Storage_Filesystem_and_Memory-Management_Summit-2016)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
