# Exposing extent information to user space [LWN.net]

By **Jake Edge**  
May 4, 2016 

* * *

[LSFMM 2016](/Articles/lsfmm2016/)

In a short, filesystem-only session at the 2016 Linux Storage, Filesystem, and Memory-Management Summit, Josef Bacik led a discussion on exposing information on extents, which are contiguous ranges of blocks allocated for a file (or files) by the filesystem, to user space. That could be done either by extending the [`FIEMAP` `ioctl()` command](/Articles/260795/) or by coming up with a new interface. Bacik said that he was standing in for Mark Fasheh, who was unable to attend the session. 

[ ![\[Josef Bacik\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2016/lsf-bacik-sm.jpg) ](/Articles/686115/)

`FIEMAP` just reports whether an extent is shared or not, but there are some applications that want to know which inodes are sharing the extents. There are reserved 64-bit fields in `struct fiemap_extent` that could be used to report the inode numbers, Bacik said. He asked if that seemed like a reasonable approach. 

Ric Wheeler wondered if there was really a need for applications to unwind all of this information. He asked: "Is there a backup application that will use this?" Jeff Mahoney responded that there is someone requesting the functionality. 

Darrick Wong said that as part of his [reverse mapping and `reflink()` work for XFS](/Articles/684826/) he has an interface that will allow applications to retrieve that kind of information. You can pass a range of physical block numbers to the reverse-map `ioctl()` and get back a list of objects (e.g. inodes) that think they own those blocks, he said. 

Bacik said that sounded like the right interface: "Let's use that." Wong said that he would post some patches once he returned home from the summit. 

  
  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Storage, Filesystem, and Memory-Management Summit/2016](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Storage_Filesystem_and_Memory-Management_Summit-2016)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
