# 4.8 merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
July 27, 2016
As of this writing, Linus has pulled 3,156 non-merge changesets into the
mainline repository for the 4.8 development cycle.  Based on the contents
of linux-next, 4.8 is expected to be a relatively busy cycle, so it seems
clear that the merging process has just begun.  Even so, a number of
interesting features and changes have made their way into the mainline.
Some of the more prominent user-visible changes are:
The
Storage, Filesystem, and
     Memory-Management Summit
held in April included
an extensive debate
over which of two
     transparent huge-page cache patch sets should be merged.  Both extend
     transparent huge pages to file-backed memory and make the
     tmpfs filesystem use it.  The debate appears to be resolved,
     as Kirill Shutemov's implementation was quietly merged via the -mm
     tree for 4.8.
This
     commit
contains the documentation changes that, among other
     things, show how to control the use of huge pages with tmpfs.
The kernel has a new formatted-documentation system, based on the
Sphinx
system.  See
this article
for how this change came to
     be, and
this article
for details on
     how the new scheme works.  Over time, the hope is, this change will
     lead to better, more integrated kernel documentation.
As usual, a lot has happened within the perf events subsystem; see
this
     pull request
for a detailed list.
Some support code for the
virtually mapped
     kernel stacks
feature has been merged, but the feature itself has
     been deferred until 4.9 for further testing.
The
kernel address-space layout
     randomization feature
has been
     extended on the x86_64 architecture; the range of randomization has
     been increased, and more regions of kernel memory will have their
     placement randomized.  With luck, users will not notice anything
     beyond a failure of exploit scripts to work as reliably as before.
The NVMe-over-fabrics subsystem allows the kernel to export
NVM Express
storage devices over networks and using protocols like
RDMA
.
The device-mapper subsystem now supports direct access to underlying
     persistent-memory devices via the DAX mechanism.  The dm-raid target
     has also seen a number of improvements, including support for
     reshaping of arrays and device takeover.
The new ACPI overlay mechanism allows the updating of ACPI tables from
     firmware or via configfs.
The GPIO subsystem has a new user-space ABI for the management of
     general-purpose I/O lines; it is based on char devices and replaces
     the long-deprecated sysfs interface.  In the absence of any sort of
     documentation, interested readers can see the
gpio-hammer
and
gpio-event-mon
examples added to the
tools
directory.
New hardware support includes:
Industrial I/O
:
     	  Freescale MMA7660FC 3-axis accelerometers,
	  Bosch BMA220 3-axis accelerometers,
	  Maxim MAX5487/MAX5488/MAX5489 digital potentiometers, and
	  Broadcom iProc analog-to-digital converters.
Media
:
     	  Sony HELENE Sat/Ter (CXD2858ER) tuners,
	  Renesas R-Car video-input controllers (replacement driver),
	  Mediatek video processor units and video codecs,
	  Pulse Eight HDMI CEC controllers, and
	  Renesas frame compression processors.
Miscellaneous
:
     	  TI DA8xx USB PHYs,
	  Sensirion SHT3x-DIS humidity and temperature sensors,
	  Texas Instruments INA3221 triple power monitors,
	  Fujitsu Technology Solutions Teutates sensor chips,
	  Oxford Semiconductor OXNAS RPS timers,
     	  Amlogic Meson random number generators,
	  Maxim MAX77620 and MAX20024 GPIO controllers, and
	  MediaTek MT6323 power-management controllers.
Networking
KeyStream KS7010 based SDIO WIFI cards.
Changes visible to kernel developers include:
There is a new set of
atomic_fetch_*()
primitives for
     performing operations on
atomic_t
variables and returning the
     previous value.  See
this article
for
     more information.
The
reimplementation of the kernel's timer
     wheel
has been merged.  The new code provides better performance,
     in particular avoiding the latency-inducing "cascade" operations
     required by its predecessor.  The cost is that far-future events will
     happen with less accuracy than before, but nobody could come up with a
     scenario where that mattered.
The crypto subsystem has a new "key agreement" mechanism to support
     the implementation of key-exchange protocols like Diffie-Hellman.  It
     is rigorously undocumented; the best information available is in
this
     commit
and the associated source.
The SLUB memory allocator now implements free-list randomization,
     adding a bit of unpredictability to allocations.
Ranges of memory allocated by device drivers (or other subsystems) are
     typically not relocatable by the memory-management code.  That can
     interfere with the compaction code in tight-memory situations.  To
     make things better, there is
a new API
that allows drivers to cooperate with the memory-management code in
     the relocation of their pages when needed.  The balloon driver and
     zram subsystem both use
     this feature in 4.8, but there should be benefits to moving some other
     drivers over as well.
By the usual schedule, the 4.8 merge window should close on August 7,
and the final 4.8 release can be expected on September 25.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Releases/4.8
to post comments