# Atomic primitives in the kernel [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

July 27, 2016

This article was contributed by Neil Brown

Since the Linux kernel typically has multiple threads of control running in parallel, quite possibly working on the same data, it is essential to have primitives that allow coordination among those threads. Additionally, it is beneficial to have a wide range of interfaces so that the right tool for any specific job is both easy to find and easy to use. It would not be fair to say that Linux has had a paucity of such primitives, but it has recently gained a generous helping of new operations anyway; that provides a convenient opportunity to have a look at what is available and why something new was needed.

**Composite primitives**  
Probably the most extreme example of a limited architecture is 32-bit SPARC processors, which only provide [an RMW operation that writes back all '1' bits after reading a value](http://comp.mq.edu.au/%7Emike/comp226/sparc-manual/Load/ldstub.html). This is sufficient for implementing a spinlock, but little else. To take a lock, the code can repeatedly use that instruction until it fetches a number that isn't all ones. This indicates that the current thread has gained the lock. It can then drop the lock by writing anything else to the address.

For SPARC-32, Linux implements all other synchronization primitives by first taking a spinlock, then performing the operation, then dropping the lock. It maintains a small hash table of locks, currently with four entries, and uses the address of the value being operated on to choose a lock to protect the operation. This allows some concurrency between non-conflicting synchronization operations and provides reasonable results on what is, today, an ancient architecture.
