# The need for TTY slave devices [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

September 14, 2016

This article was contributed by Neil Brown

A typical computer system has numerous "buses" to carry data and control from the CPU out to various peripheral devices and back. Linux generally supports these buses by having "master" drivers to manage the hardware at the CPU end of the bus, and "slave" drivers to manage the peripheral. There is one particular bus for which there are no slave drivers, at least not in the normal sense, but for which there is recurring interest in supporting the creation of such drivers. The asynchronous character-oriented serial bus, one of the oldest bus types that is still in wide use today, is managed quite differently from other buses, but might soon be enhanced to better meet current needs.

One difficulty I have in discussing this bus is that there does not seem to be a suitably generic name. Once upon a time I would have called it a "serial connection", but today most connections are serial, whether SATA, SAS (serial attached SCSI), Ethernet, or I2C. So that name doesn't work. RS-232 was once a popular name, but that specifies higher voltage levels and more wires than are normally found on the intra-board connections that we will be interested in. The name UART, standing for Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter, is at about the right level of generality, but really refers to the controlling hardware rather than the bus itself. TTY, an abbreviation for "teletype", is the name I will largely use, not because there are any teletypewriters connected to any computers I have used in a long time, but because it is a name that is widely used in Unix and Linux history and in present implementations, and it is nice and short.

When a computer system has some TTY ports, Linux will discover these ports and create devices like `/dev/ttyS0` to allow them to be managed. In general, Linux knows nothing about what might be connected to the port. One exception is that a "console" might be known to be attached to one of the ports, and Linux will then send kernel messages to that port. In other cases, Linux needs to be explicitly told what is attached if it is expected to handle it in any particular way.

#### Line disciplines

Linux doesn't always _need_ to know what is attached to a TTY port — a program in user space can open the `/dev/ttyXX` device and read or write as appropriate. Sometimes, though, it can be helpful for the kernel to take a larger role; for those times there are ["line disciplines"](https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/include/uapi/linux/tty.h?id=c6935931c1894ff857616ff8549b61236a19148f), which is really just another name for "protocol handlers". As an example: dial-up networking uses a modem to connect a TTY port on one machine to a similar port on another machine. Once a connection is established over the modem, the PPP protocol is often used to allow Internet traffic to flow between the computers. As this requires tight integration with the networking subsystem in the kernel, it is easiest if the PPP protocol itself is handled directly by Linux. To this end, there is an `N_PPP` line discipline. Once the connection is established, `pppd` (the user-space daemon for managing the connection) sets the line discipline to `N_PPP` and all further traffic is handled directly by the kernel.

Another line discipline that was once more widely used than it is now is the `N_MOUSE` protocol for communicating with serial-attached mice. `N_MOUSE` passes data from the TTY port though to the "input" subsystem so it appears on `/dev/input/mouse0` or similar and can be easily used by your windowing system. There are a collection of other line disciplines for various different serial protocols. Each one needs to be explicitly activated by a program like `pppd` for `N_PPP`, `inputattach` for `N_MOUSE`, and `hciattach` for `N_HCI` (the protocol for communicating with Bluetooth transceivers). The line discipline only remains active for as long as that program keeps the TTY device open.

If line disciplines were being invented today, they would almost certainly be drivers on a bus that would get bound to the hardware either automatically, or by writing to a `bind` file in `sysfs`.

#### Problematic use cases

Though the mechanism for attaching a line discipline to a TTY port allows a lot of serial-attached devices to be used quite effectively, there are two areas where the current solution is not entirely satisfactory thus motivating various people to seek improvements. These areas involve transparent discovery and sideband controls such as power management.

If I have a computer system, such as a mobile device, which has, for example, a Bluetooth transceiver permanently attached to a UART, then I shouldn't have to tell the software running on that device about the hardware arrangement. The firmware on the device should _know_ about the Bluetooth device, possibly from nodes in a device-tree description of the hardware, or possibly from information in the ACPI tables, and something should read that description and configure the TTY port appropriately. It might be possible for a user-space program to extract the information and run `hciattach`, but as firmware tables are normally interpreted by the kernel, and as `hciattach` does little more than request the `N_HCI` line discipline, it seems sensible to have the kernel set everything up transparently. The "little more" that `hciattach` does might involve setting a bit rate, performing some initialization, or uploading firmware. All of these are the sorts of things the kernel already does, so it would be no extra burden.

Even in cases where the device can be managed without a dedicated line discipline, there might be a need to do more than just send and receive bytes. Power management is important in all computer systems these days and, while some serial-attached devices can power themselves up or down in response to commands over the serial connection, this capability is not universal. Were we using RS-232, the DTR (data terminal ready) line would probably be used to manage power, but many UARTs do not have a DTR line, and asserting a signal is not necessarily the best way to control power for an integrated device. Device power management in Linux is generally handled by the device driver for the particular device, since it knows the needs and is able to assert a GPIO output, activate a regulator, or whatever else is needed. But, with TTY ports, there is no slave device driver to perform these tasks.

Both of these difficulties could be solved if a TTY were treated more like a bus that could have slave devices attached as children. The configuring of child devices is the normal way that device information from device tree or ACPI tables is handled, and these devices would be well placed to select a non-default line discipline or to control the power management of the device when it is opened or activated.

#### Where to put the device

Though I was not involved in the most recent discussions on this topic, I have attempted to make progress in this problem space in the past; a recurring problem is that it wasn't obvious, to me at least, what shape the solution should take. Above, I have described the need as being for a "TTY bus" with "slave devices" but that understanding only came about after several failures, and there is not yet a certainty that it is best solution.

Linux has a concept of a ["platform bus"](https://www.kernel.org/doc/Documentation/driver-model/platform.txt), which is a "pseudo-bus" that is described more by examples than by a concrete purpose. It is contrasted with "large formally specified [buses] like PCI or USB." A driver to control a GPIO line to manage the power of a GPS device attached to a TTY could easily be seen as part of the "platform" rather than part of a genuine bus, particularly if you didn't think of a TTY as a "bus", which I certainly didn't. So an [early attempt](https://lwn.net/Articles/625953/) created a platform device to handle power management and taught the TTY driver to tell the attached platform device when it was opened or closed. This didn't address the auto-detection need, which did not concern me at the time. The patch was [vetoed by Greg Kroah-Hartman](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=20160814113513.GB21529%40kroah.com), both when I proposed it and when it was [recently re-proposed](https://lwn.net/Articles/697175/) by Sebastian Reichel, who is trying to make the Bluetooth transceiver on the Nokia N950 work correctly. As Kroah-Hartman put it: ""I've said before that a "serial" bus should be created"".

Rob Herring [responded to this challenge](https://lwn.net/Articles/697534/) and proposed a "UART slave device bus" that is not entirely unlike [something I proposed last year](https://lwn.net/Articles/643878/). Linux contains a "serial core" subsystem that supports a wide range of serial character devices and which provides a `uart_port` abstraction. This is separate from the "tty" subsystem, which provides a `tty_port`, handles all the peculiarities of Posix TTY devices, and manages the line disciplines. As all the devices that anyone wanted to create a slave device for were UARTs, it seemed natural to both Herring and myself to make changes at the `uart_port` level.

Alan Cox [vetoed this one](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=20160818152528.569eb426%40lxorguk.ukuu.org.uk). In his view, the UART isn't the right place to attach slaves because not all serial devices use the UART code, or not in the same way. In particular, USB-attached serial ports do not use the UART code at all. Cox recalled that: ""As I told you over six months ago uart_port is not the correct abstraction. You need to be working at the tty_port layer,"" and [again](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=20160819123808.05b9dc3c%40lxorguk.ukuu.org.uk): ""This again is why it needs to be at the tty_port layer."" The `tty_port` interface, provided by the TTY layer, is clearly the more general interface for serial devices .... or is it?

#### The serio bus

There are some serial character devices that don't use UARTs and don't even interface with the TTY layer. The most common example is the PS/2 mouse. The over-the-wire protocol used by a PS/2 mouse is similar to that used by serial-port mice, but is more constrained and so can be supported with simpler hardware than a UART. In Linux, the driver for PS/2 mouse hardware (and PS/2 keyboards as well) is attached to the `serio` (serial I/O) bus, which feeds into the `input` subsystem.

The `N_MOUSE` TTY line discipline mentioned earlier is really a generic gateway from TTY devices into the `serio` bus. It was designed for use with serial mice, but could be used with any device with a similar character-based interface. Herring, [with a little prompting from Arnd Bergmann](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=12886761.WF058qtZp8%40wuerfel), wondered if the `serio` bus could become the place to attach the slave devices that we seem to want. To this end, he [prepared some patches](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=20160824232437.9446-1-robh%40kernel.org) that allow device tree configuration to direct a serio device to attach to the HCI interface for the Bluetooth subsystem. With these patches it is still necessary to run `inputattach` to gateway the TTY to the serio bus using the `N_MOUSE` line discipline. Herring claims: ""Once a tty_port based serio port driver is in place, this step will not be needed"". In some ways, this seems like an step in the right direction, in others it seems like it might just be moving the problem to a new location.

While this serio approach could work well for auto-configuration of Bluetooth devices, it isn't obvious that it works well for power management of GPS receivers using sideband signaling. For a GPS receiver we really still need the TTY device, `/dev/ttyXX`, to exist much as it does now. We don't want to attach an alternate line discipline, because the kernel doesn't understand the protocols (such as [NMEA](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/NMEA_0183) and various binary protocols) that GPS devices use. The current solution of running [`gpsd`](http://catb.org/gpsd/) to interpret these protocols is quite effective. Though Marcel Holtmann [attested](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=28DDAF2B-2341-403B-80D8-DA0A63F51FF1%40holtmann.org) that he is ""not convinced that GPS should be represented as /dev/ttyS0 or similar TTY"" and Kroah-Hartman [expressed support for this position](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=20160818105521.GB7031%40kroah.com), the creation of a GPS device type seems to be a separate need than allowing a device to be powered on when a TTY is opened, and powered off when it is closed.

#### Ideas for forward progress

Though this recent conversation does not seem to have produced any code that is likely to get merged, it did bring up a lot of ideas and a lot of constructive criticism for why some of the proposals were not satisfactory. One of the most discouraging responses one can get when submitting a patch is to have it rejected with no clear explanation of why it was rejected. That didn't happen here. Of all the feedback that was provided, possibly the most concretely useful was Cox's insistence that `tty_port` should be the basis of a new bus (""The basic problem is that the bus should be tty_ports not uart, fix that and the rest starts to make sense."") and his explanation of the role of the `tty_port` as the item in the device model which ""has the lifetime of the hardware"".

When serial hardware is discovered, whether it is a UART, a USB-attached serial port, or something else, a `tty_port` is created. It is currently registered as a character device so that an entry appears in `/dev`, which can then be opened. When it is opened, a `tty_struct` is attached, and line disciplines can be attached to that. The right approach seems to be to insert a [bus abstraction](https://lwn.net/Articles/645810/) under the `tty_port` so that different drivers can be bound to the port. The default driver would register a character device that would attach a `tty_struct` when it was opened. Other drivers might connect through to the Bluetooth subsystem, or might interpose some power management controls and then register a TTY character device.

One reason this hasn't been done already is that the TTY layer is a little complicated. `tty_port` and `tty_struct` are closely intertwined and separating them, as seems to be required, is not a task for the timid. Cox has [posted an RFC patch](http://www.mail-archive.com/search?l=mid&q=20160822183849.6dfdb9d2%40lxorguk.ukuu.org.uk) that takes a step in this direction by allowing a `tty_port` to be used without an open file handle. There is a lot more that would need to be done, but this is a valuable start, particularly as it comes from someone with a deep knowledge of the TTY layer who can probably see the end game more clearly than the rest of us. 

The conversation has died down for the moment. That might mean that people have been distracted by more urgent issues, or it could mean that now is a time for coding rather than discussion. This is a topic that has arisen several times in the past and while it is generally met with enthusiastic in-principle agreement, it does not seem have been quite important enough to anyone to push through the various barriers to find a solution that is broadly acceptable. Maybe this time will be different.

In a conversation on the Kernel Summit email list concerning the different sorts of "stable" kernels that vendors use and how much is being backported to them, Tim Bird [lamented](https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/ksummit-discuss/2016-September/003802.html) that ""there are still significant areas where the mainline kernel just doesn't have the support needed for shipping product." The appropriate emphasis, in the mainline kernel community, to require well designed and fully general solutions inevitably means that some functionality takes a while to land. This means that vendors with tight deadlines need to choose between staying close to mainline or having all the functionality they want. It is understandable that they will often choose the latter. Finding ways to minimize the need for this choice is one of the ongoing challenges for the kernel community and one that we might see playing out, in a small way, with the need for TTY slave devices."

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [TTY layer](/Kernel/Index#TTY_layer)  
[GuestArticles](/Archives/GuestIndex/)| [Brown, Neil](/Archives/GuestIndex/#Brown_Neil)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
