# statx() v3 [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
November 30, 2016 

Some developments just take a long time to truly come to fruition. That has proved to be the case for the proposed `statx()` system call — at least, the "long time" part has, even if we may still be waiting for "fruition". By most accounts, though, this extension to the `stat()` system call would appear to be getting closer to being ready. Recent patches show the current state of `statx()` and where the remaining sticking points are. 

The [`stat()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/stat.2.html) system call, which returns metadata about a file, has a long history, having made its debut in the Version 1 Unix release in 1971. It has changed little in the following 45 years, even though the rest of the operating system has changed around it. Thus, it's unsurprising that `stat()` tends to fall short of current requirements. It is unable to represent much of the information relevant to files now, including generation and version numbers, file creation time, encryption status, whether they are stored on a remote server, and so on. It gives the caller no choice about which information to obtain, possibly forcing expensive operations to obtain data that the application does not need. The timestamp fields have [year-2038 problems](/Articles/563285/). And so on. 

David Howells has been sporadically working on replacing `stat()` since 2010; his [version 3 patch](/Articles/707604/) (counting since he restarted the effort earlier this year) came out on November 23. While the proposed `statx()` system call looks much the same as it did when [we looked at it in May](/Articles/685791/), there have been a few changes. 

The prototype for `statx()` is still: 
    
    
        int statx(int dfd, const char *filename, unsigned atflag, unsigned mask,
    	      struct statx *buffer);
    

Normally, `dfd` is a file descriptor identifying a directory, and `filename` is the name of the file of interest; that file is expected to be found relative to the given directory. If `filename` is passed as NULL, then `dfd` is interpreted as referring directly to the file being queried. Thus, `statx()` supersedes the functionality of both `stat()` and `fstat()`. 

The `atflag` argument modifies the behavior of the system call. It handles a couple of flags that already exist in current kernels: `AT_SYMLINK_NOFOLLOW` to return information about a symbolic link rather than following it, and `AT_NO_AUTOMOUNT` to prevent the automounting of remote filesystems. A set of new flags just for `statx()` controls the synchronization of data with remote servers, allowing applications to adjust the balance between I/O activity and accurate results. `AT_STATX_FORCE_SYNC` will force a synchronization with a remote server, even if the local kernel thinks its information is current, while `AT_STATX_DONT_SYNC` inhibits queries to the remote server, yielding fast results that may be out-of-date or entirely unavailable. 

The `atflag` parameter, thus, controls what `statx()` will do to obtain the data; `mask`, instead, controls which data is obtained. The available flags here allow the application to request file permissions, type, number of links, ownership, timestamps, and more. The special value `STATX_BASIC_STATS` returns everything `stat()` would, while `STATX_ALL` returns everything available. Reducing the amount of information requested might reduce the amount of I/O required to execute the system call, but some reviewers worry that developers will just use `STATX_ALL` to avoid the need to think about it. 

The final argument, `buffer`, contains a structure to be filled with the relevant information; in this version of the patch this structure looks like: 
    
    
        struct statx {
    	__u32	stx_mask;	/* What results were written [uncond] */
    	__u32	stx_blksize;	/* Preferred general I/O size [uncond] */
    	__u64	stx_attributes;	/* Flags conveying information about the file [uncond] */
    	__u32	stx_nlink;	/* Number of hard links */
    	__u32	stx_uid;	/* User ID of owner */
    	__u32	stx_gid;	/* Group ID of owner */
    	__u16	stx_mode;	/* File mode */
    	__u16	__spare0[1];
    	__u64	stx_ino;	/* Inode number */
    	__u64	stx_size;	/* File size */
    	__u64	stx_blocks;	/* Number of 512-byte blocks allocated */
    	__u64	__spare1[1];
    	struct statx_timestamp	stx_atime;	/* Last access time */
    	struct statx_timestamp	stx_btime;	/* File creation time */
    	struct statx_timestamp	stx_ctime;	/* Last attribute change time */
    	struct statx_timestamp	stx_mtime;	/* Last data modification time */
    	__u32	stx_rdev_major;	/* Device ID of special file [if bdev/cdev] */
    	__u32	stx_rdev_minor;
    	__u32	stx_dev_major;	/* ID of device containing file [uncond] */
    	__u32	stx_dev_minor;
    	__u64	__spare2[14];	/* Spare space for future expansion */
        };
    

Here, `stx_mask` indicates which fields are actually valid; it will be the intersection of the information requested by the application and what the filesystem is able to provide. `stx_attributes` contains flags describing the state of the file; they indicate whether the file is compressed, encrypted, immutable, append-only, not to be included in backups, or an automount point. 

The timestamp fields contain this structure: 
    
    
        struct statx_timestamp {
    	__s64	tv_sec;
    	__s32	tv_nsec;
    	__s32	__reserved;
        };
    

The `__reserved` field was added in the version 3 patch as the result of one of the strongest points of disagreement in recent discussions about `statx()`. Dave Chinner [suggested](/Articles/707607/) that, at some point in the future, nanosecond resolution may no longer be adequate; he said that the interface should be able to handle femtosecond timestamps. He was mostly alone on that point; other participants, [such as Alan Cox](/Articles/707608/), said that the speed of light will ensure that we never need timestamps below nanosecond resolution. Chinner insisted, though, so Howells added the `__reserved` field with the idea that it can be pressed into service should the need arise in the future. 

Chinner had a number of other objections about the interface, some of which have not yet been addressed. These include the definition of the `STATX_ATTR_` flags, which shadow a set of existing flags used with the `FS_IOC_GETFLAGS` and `FS_IOC_SETFLAGS` `ioctl()` calls. Reusing the flags allows a micro-optimization of the `statx()` code but, Chinner says, it perpetuates some interface mistakes made in the past. Ted Ts'o [offered similar advice](/Articles/707611/) when reviewing a 2015 version of the patch set, but version 3 retains the same flag definitions. 

The largest of Chinner's objections, though, may well be the absence of a comprehensive set of tests for `statx()`. This code, he [said](/Articles/707609/), should not go in until those tests are provided: 

Quite frankly, I think this has to be an unconditional requirement for such generic, expandable new syscall functionality - either we get test coverage for it before merge, or we don't merge it. We've demonstrated time and time again that shit doesn't work if it's not tested and cannot be widely verified by independent filesystem developers. 

This position has been echoed by others ([Michael Kerrisk, for example](/Articles/704479/)) recently. The kernel does have a long history of merging new system calls that do not work as advertised, with corresponding pain resulting later on. Howells will likely end up providing such tests, but [not yet](/Articles/707610/): 

Given the amount of bikeshedding that's taken place on this, I'm glad I *haven't* done the testsuite yet - it would have much more than doubled the amount of work. I *still* don't know what the final form is going to be. 

The rate of change of the patch set does seem to be slowing so, perhaps, its final form is beginning to come into focus. The history of this work suggests that it would not be wise to predict its merging in the near future, though. The `stat()` system call has been with us for a long time; it's reasonable to expect that `statx()` will last for just as long. A bit of extra "bikeshedding" to get the interface right seems understandable in that context.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems/stat()](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems-stat)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [System calls](/Kernel/Index#System_calls)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
