# Debating the value of XDP [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
December 6, 2016
All parts of the kernel are shaped by the need for performance and
scalability, but some subsystems feel those pressures more than others.
The networking subsystem, which can be asked to handle steady-state
workloads involving millions of
packets per second, has had to look at
numerous technologies in its search for improved performance.  One result
of that work has been the "express data path" (or XDP) mechanism.  Now,
however, XDP is seeing some pushback from developers who see it as
"pointless," a possible long-term maintenance problem, and a distraction
from the work that networking developers need to be doing.
The core idea behind XDP is optimizing cases where relatively simple
decisions can be made about incoming packets.  It allows the loading of a
BPF program into the kernel; that program gets an opportunity to inspect
packets before they enter the networking stack itself.  The
initial use case
for XDP was to enable the
quick dropping of unwanted packets, but it has since expanded to cover
simple routing decisions and packet modifications; see
this
in-progress documentation
for some more information on how it works.
The core benefit of XDP is that the system can make quick decisions about
packets without the need to 
involve the rest of the networking code.  Performance could possibly be
further improved
in some settings by loading XDP programs directly into the network
interface, perhaps after a translation step.
Thus far, most of the public discussion about XDP has been focused on the
details of its implementation rather than on whether XDP is a good idea in
the first place.  That came to an end at the beginning of December, though,
when Florian Westphal, in
a posting
written with help from Hannes Frederic Sowa, let it be known that he disagrees:
"
Lots of XDP related patches started to appear on netdev.  I'd prefer
if it would stop...
"  He would rather that developers turned away
from a "
well meaning but pointless
" approach toward something
that, in his view, is better suited to the problems faced by the networking
subsystem.
That something, in short, is any of the mechanisms out there (such as the
data plane development kit
) that allow the
networking stack to be bypassed by user-space code.  These mechanisms can
indeed yield improved performance in settings where a strictly defined set
of functionality is needed and the benefits that come from a
general-purpose network stack can be done without.  Additionally, he said,
some problems are best solved by utilizing the packet-filtering features
implemented in the hardware.
XDP, Westphal said, is an inferior solution because it provides a poorer
programming environment.  Networking code done in user space can be written
in any of a range of languages, has full debugging support available, and
so on.  
BPF programs, instead, are harder to develop and much more limited in their
potential functionality.  Looking at a number of use cases for XDP,
including routing, load balancing, and early packet filtering, he claims
that there are better solutions for each.
Thomas Graf
responded
that he has a
fundamental problem with user-space networking: as soon as a packet leaves
the kernel, anything can happen to it and it is no longer possible to make
security decisions about it.  User-space code could be compromised and there
is no way for the kernel to know.  BPF code in the kernel, instead, should
be more difficult to compromise since its freedom of action is much more
restricted.  He also said that load balancing often needs to be done within
applications as well as across machines, and he would not want to see that
done in user space.
Sowa, instead,
questioned
the early-drop
use case, asking whether the focus was on additional types of protection or
improved performance.  Like Westphal, he suggested that this problem could
be solved primarily with hardware-based packet dropping.  The
answer
from Tom 
Herbert made it clear that he sees both flexibility and performance as
being needed:
DDOS mitigation alone is probably a sufficient motivation to look
	at XDP. We need something that drops bad packets as quickly as
	possible when under attack, we need this to be integrated into the
	stack, we need it to be programmable to deal with the increasing
	savvy of attackers, and we don't want to be forced to be dependent
	on HW solutions. This is why we created XDP!
Networking maintainer David Miller also
said
that he sees XDP as being a good solution
for packet dropping use cases.  Hardware-based filters, he said, are not up
to the job, and XDP looks to him to be the right approach.
Sowa's other concern was not so easily addressed, though.  As XDP programs
gain functionality, they will need access to increasingly sophisticated
information from the rest of the networking stack.  That information can be
provided by way of functions callable from BPF, but those functions will
likely become part of the kernel's user-space ABI.  That, in turn, will
limit the changes that the networking developers can make in the future.
These concerns mirror the
worries about
tracepoints
that have limited their 
use in parts of the kernel.
Nobody in the discussion addressed the ABI problem; in the end, it will
have to be handled like any other user-space interface, where new features
are, hopefully, added with care and a lot of review.
In the end, the discussion probably changed few minds about the value of
XDP — or the lack thereof.  Stephen Hemminger probably summarized things
best when he
said
that there is room for a
number of different approaches.  XDP is better for "
high speed packet
mangling
", while user-space approaches are going to be better for
the implementation of large chunks of networking infrastructure.  The
networking world is complex, and getting more so; a variety of approaches
will be needed to solve all the problems that the kernel is facing in this
area.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Networking/eXpress Data Path (XDP)
to post comments