# Finishing out the 4.10 merge window [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 3, 2017 

As expected, the 4.10 merge window ended on December 25 with the [4.10-rc1](/Articles/710185/) release. In the end, 11,455 non-merge changesets were pulled into the mainline repository for 4.10, making this a reasonably busy development cycle, even if it falls far short of 4.9. Less than 400 of those changes were pulled after [the December 22 summary](/Articles/709556/) was written, so the list of additional changes is short. 

That list includes: 

  * The PA-RISC architecture has gained support for kernel address-space layout randomization. 

  * The [cache-allocation technology](/Articles/694800/) patch set has been merged. These patches provide access to a new mechanism in Intel processors by which the processor's memory cache can be partitioned between processes. It can be used to keep one group of processes (a container, say) from dominating the cache, or to set aside a portion of the cache for a set of privileged processes. 

  * There are new drivers for QLogic QEDI 25/40/100Gb iSCSI initiators and Loongson1 SoC hardware watchdogs. 

  * The `cycle_t` type used for clock values inside the kernel has been removed; a plain `u64` type is now used instead. 




The 4.10 stabilization period got off to a slow start due to the holidays; only 27 non-merge changesets were applied between 4.10-rc1 and 4.10-rc2. The pace of change can be expected to pick up, though, as developers return to work and the final 4.10 release date (probably February 12 or 19) approaches.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.10](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.10)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
