# The trouble with SMC-R [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
May 18, 2017 

Among [the many features merged for the 4.11 kernel](/Articles/715161/) was the "shared memory communications over RDMA" (SMC-R) protocol from IBM. SMC-R is a high-speed data-center communications protocol that is claimed to be much more efficient than basic TCP sockets. As it turns out, though, the merging of this code was a surprise — and an unpleasant one at that — to a relevant segment of the kernel development community. This issue and the difficulties in resolving it are an indicator of how the increasingly fast-paced kernel development community can go off track. 

The [patch set](/Articles/711071/) that was eventually merged (via the networking tree) for 4.11 claims a decrease in CPU consumption of up to 60% over basic TCP sockets. The protocol is designed in such a way that existing TCP applications can be made to use it simply by linking them against a special library — no code changes required. On the other hand, it requires bypassing much of the network stack (including firewalls, monitoring, and traffic control) and shorting out the code that tries to keep the networking layer from creating too much memory pressure. In many settings, those may be a price that users are willing to pay. 

The problem, as [raised](/Articles/723074/) by Christoph Hellwig on May 1, is that this RDMA-based protocol was merged without any input from the RDMA development community; it was never posted to the linux-rdma mailing list. Once the RDMA developers took a look at it, they found a number of things to dislike. SMC-R adds a new API, rather than using the existing RDMA APIs, for example. It has no support for IPv6, and the fact that it defines its own `AF_SMC` address family makes it unclear how an application could ever specify whether it wanted IPv6 or not. (It's worth noting that missing IPv6 support has [blocked other protocol implementations](/Articles/422649/) in the past). There is also [a significant security issue](/Articles/723075/) with SMC-R, in that it opens read/write access to all of memory from a remote system. 

The RDMA developers, being less than pleased with all of this and feeling that they should have been consulted prior to the merging of SMC-R, are wanting to do something about it. But what can actually be done is not entirely clear at this point. Hellwig posted [a patch](/Articles/723077/) marking the subsystem as "broken" and adding a strong warning about the security issue, but that patch has not yet been merged and probably never will be in that form. 

Networking maintainer David Miller [responded](/Articles/723078/) that Hellwig was being ""overbearing"" by trying to mark SMC-R as being broken, and [added](/Articles/723079/) that there is no possibility of changing the API before it develops users: ""The API is out there already so we are out of luck, and neither you nor I nor anyone else can 'stop' this from happening"". SMC-R, in other words, is a _fait accompli_ that cannot be removed at this point. 

RDMA maintainer Doug Ledford [disagreed](/Articles/723081/), noting that 4.11 has only been out since the end of April and has almost certainly not appeared in distributions yet. The "standard" that defines this protocol ([RFC 7609](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc7609/?include_text=1)) is, he pointed out, just an informational posting from IBM without actual standard status. There is nothing, he said, that prevents recalling SMC-R at this time. For now, Miller has applied [a version of Hellwig's patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/19a0f7e37c0761a0a1cbf550705a6063c9675223) that removes the "broken" marker but keeps the security warning. Ledford still [thinks](/Articles/723085/), though, that the option of marking SMC-R broken (or moving it to staging) should still be on the table. 

Ledford, along with others, also complained loudly that this subsystem was merged without having ever been brought to the attention of the RDMA mailing list. Miller [fired back](/Articles/723089/) that he had explicitly tried to slow the progress of this patch set in the hope that it would get some substantive reviews, but ""I can't push back on people with silly coding style and small semantic issues forever"". He complained that evidently nobody from the RDMA community is following the netdev mailing list, which is where the patches were posted. The discussion went around a bit on whether Miller should have asked the SMC-R submitters to copy their patches to the linux-rdma list as well, without any real agreement being reached. 

The reason that there are no RDMA developers on netdev, despite the obvious overlap between RDMA and networking, is an old story: the traffic on netdev (150-200 messages per day) has reached a level where the RDMA developers feel they simply cannot keep up with it. Developers used to say the same thing about linux-kernel, before everybody simply gave up on it altogether. As the community grows and the patch volume increases, this type of process-scalability issue will move downward through the subsystem hierarchy. Developers stop keeping up with relevant discussions because they cannot read all that email and still have time to actually get some development done. 

Ledford [proposed](/Articles/723122/) a solution of sorts for the problem of email volume: split netdev into separate lists for core networking, Ethernet drivers, and "netdev-packet". Ironically, that is likely to make the sort of communication issue that led to this discussion worse; as the development community segregates itself into increasingly specialized lists, communication across the community as a whole will be reduced. In a small town, everybody knows what everybody else is up to; that is not true in a large city. The kernel project resembles an increasingly large city in this regard. 

This fracturing of the kernel community has been evident for at least two decades; it is likely to present significant scalability issues if the kernel project continues to grow. For the time being, [the SMC-R issue appears to be headed toward a resolution](/Articles/723123/), with the RDMA developers seeing a path by which the problems in the protocol and its implementation can be addressed. But this will certainly not be the last time that the development community is tripped up as a result of developers not being able to keep up with what their colleagues are doing.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Code review](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Code_review)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Networking/Protocols](/Kernel/Index#Networking-Protocols)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
