# User-space access to WMI functions [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 19, 2017 

Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI) is a vaguely defined mechanism for the control of platform-specific devices; laptop functions like special buttons, LEDs, and the backlight are often controlled through WMI interfaces. On Linux, access to WMI functions is restricted to the kernel, while Windows allows user space to use them as well. A recent proposal to make WMI functions available to user space in Linux as well spawned a slow-moving conversation that turned on a couple of interesting questions — only one of which was anticipated in the proposal itself. 

Darren Hart, the kernel's x86 platform-driver maintainer, [proposed](/Articles/725726/) making WMI functions available to user space in early May. The reasoning behind this change took a while to come out, but can be found in [this message](/Articles/725727/) that was posted one month later. The problem that Hart is trying to solve is the result of a good change in the market: vendors of laptops and similar devices are starting to acquire an interest in supporting Linux, and they are finding the current scheme hard to work with. 

Getting Linux working well on a contemporary laptop means ensuring that all of the special buttons work as expected, the backlight can be dimmed, the audio volume can be controlled, the radios can be turned on and off, etc. Each laptop vendor has its own way of connecting these features to WMI functions; as a result, the kernel has to be taught about each new laptop design before it will work as intended. The changes required are typically small to the point of being trivial, but they are indeed required, and it seems that some vendors are finding the process of getting those changes into the mainline cumbersome. It takes too long (a claim that Greg Kroah-Hartman [questioned](/Articles/725728/)), and requires working with those pesky kernel developers. 

Hart would like to see that platform-support code move to user space, eliminating the need to get changes into the kernel to support a new device. It would, he said, open the flood gates to interesting new developments and ""allow vendors to 'own their own destiny' and innovate and support their platforms independently"". He also argued that moving this code to user space would avoid cluttering the kernel with platform-support code that nobody will care about 18 months in the future. 

He did have one concern, though, having to do with backward compatibility. The existing kernel-space drivers make use of WMI functions now; allowing user space to play with the same functions is likely to lead to confusion at best. So the proposal included a blacklist mechanism allowing the kernel to block access to any WMI function that it is using. So far, so good, but there is a potential problem: if a new feature is added to the kernel that involves using a WMI function that had not been used before, blocking access to that function might break a user-space application that started using it before the kernel did. Hart's question was: would this sort of ABI change run afoul of the kernel's no-regressions policy? 

This question was discussed and a potential solution emerged, but many of the developers were interested in a separate question. Andy Lutomirski probably [expressed their concern](/Articles/725729/) best: 

I should add that one thing that's really, really nice about Linux is that, when you install it on a supported laptop, it works. On Windows, you end up with a horrible pile of bloated, buggy, unsupported userspace crapware to make random buttons work. 

While I'm all for improving the manageability situation on Linux, let's please make sure we don't regress the ordinary laptop functionality story and make it as bad as it is on Windows. We're currently in a surprising situation in which laptops frequently work *better* on Linux than Windows, and I think we should preserve that. 

In other words, the idea of moving platform support to a user-space blob — perhaps a proprietary blob at that — proved to be surprisingly unappealing to a number of developers on the list. From this point of view, the fact that Windows allows user-space access to WMI functions is not an argument in favor of Linux doing the same; indeed, it could be an argument for doing the opposite. Hart [responded](/Articles/725730/) that user-space code will not necessarily be of lower quality than kernel code, and that making this functionality available to user space may increase the pool of developers who are able to work on platform support. In particular, he said, some of the people who report platform bugs now could maybe fix them if the relevant code were in user space. 

This has the look of the sort of conversation that repeats over the years without any real conclusions, but there were a few things that came out of this one. The first is that there is little interest in changing the status quo if it would inhibit the addition of support for future platforms to the kernel. The ability to run Linux on a laptop without having to chase down some vendor's platform-support blob is worth keeping. So any mechanism giving access to user space would have to allow the addition of support for future platforms, regardless of what might have been done in user space. 

There was no definitive conclusion on the backward-compatibility issue, but there was a proposal for a potential solution to the problem. Rather than blocking access to a given WMI function, a platform driver could intercept accesses and ensure that they are properly carried out. So, for example, if the kernel gains the ability to adjust the backlight brightness on a given platform, it will need to intercept access to the WMI function(s) it uses. If a user-space application attempts to use one of those functions, the kernel-space driver can look at what the application is trying to do, cause it to happen, and adjust its own internal state accordingly. If this interception is implemented correctly, it should ensure that a user-space brightness application written before the kernel gained that ability will continue to function afterward. 

The final conclusion was that there has been enough discussion of ideas without the code to accompany them. Once the proposal has been implemented, it will be easier to see what the implications are. Hart has [accepted the assignment](/Articles/725732/) to get some code posted for review. At that point there will almost certainly be another lengthy discussion on the topic.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI)](/Kernel/Index#Windows_Management_Instrumentation_WMI)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
