# 4.15 Merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
November 17, 2017 

When he [released](/Articles/738812/) 4.14, Linus Torvalds warned that the 4.15 merge window might be shorter than usual due to the US Thanksgiving holiday. Subsystem maintainers would appear to have heard him; as of this writing, over 8,800 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline since the opening of the 4.15 merge window. Read on for a summary of the most interesting changes found in that first set of patches. 

#### Core kernel

  * The control-group v2 subsystem finally has a CPU controller, bringing [a long story](/Articles/729215/) to a happy ending. 
  * The live-patching mechanism has seen a couple of significant improvements. The "shadow variables" mechanism allows the addition of data to structures; it will be used in patches that make data-structure modifications. There is also a new callback mechanism that can invoke kernel code when an object is patched, extending the ability to apply live patches affecting tricky areas like global data or assembly code. 



#### Architecture-specific

  * The openrisc architecture has gained support for SMP systems. 
  * The RISC-V architecture is now supported — [sort of](https://git.kernel.org/linus/b293fca43be544483b6488d33ad4b3ed55881064). ""The port is definitely a work in progress. While what's there builds and boots with 4.14, it's a bit hard to actually see anything happen because there are no device drivers yet"". 
  * AMD's secure encrypted virtualization feature is now supported. This feature, which builds on the [secure memory encryption](/Articles/686808/#sme) work merged in 4.14, allows virtual machines to run with memory that is encrypted and unreadable by other virtual machines or the host system. 
  * Intel's user-mode instruction prevention (UMIP) feature, which disables user-mode access to specific security-relevant instructions, is supported. The feature is disabled by default because it breaks some applications (Wine, for example), but the plan is to address these problems during this development cycle. 
  * The arm64 architecture has gained support for the [scalable vector extension](https://community.arm.com/processors/b/blog/posts/technology-update-the-scalable-vector-extension-sve-for-the-armv8-a-architecture) mechanism. 



#### Filesystems/block layer

  * The Smack security module is now able to work with the overlayfs union filesystem. 
  * The XFS filesystem has gained initial support for online filesystem checking. This feature is incomplete and is not yet intended for production use. 
  * The NVMe block driver has gained native multipath support, enabling high-performance concurrent I/O on high-end systems. 



#### Networking

  * The networking layer now supports the "ThunderboltIP" protocol for passing IP packets over a Thunderbolt cable. 
  * Support for [SCTP stream schedulers](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-tsvwg-sctp-ndata-13) has been added. Three schedulers (FCFS, priority, and round-robin) have been merged. 
  * Most TCP-related sysctl knobs have been made aware of network namespaces. 
  * The network queueing discipline subsystem now has a "credit-based shaper" module. Such documentation as exists can be found in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/585d763af09cc21daf48ecc873604ccdb70f6014). 



#### BPF

  * The user-space `bpftool` utility can be used to examine and manipulate BPF programs and maps; see [this man page](/Articles/739357/) for more information. 
  * Hooks have been added to allow security modules to control access to BPF objects; see [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/7f9ad2ace17a3521a80831208d431170ef71591f) for more information. 
  * A new BPF-based device controller has been added; it uses the version-2 control-group interface. Documentation for this feature is entirely absent, but one can look at the sample program added in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/37f1ba0909dfa12c75f8e8ea7a2f01355ebd60f1) that uses it. 



#### Hardware support

  * **GPIO** : Maxim MAX3191x industrial serializers, UniPhier GPIO controllers, and NVIDIA Tegra186 GPIO controllers. 
  * **Graphics** : Samsung S6E63J0X03 DSI command mode panels, Orise Technology otm8009a 480x800 dsi 2dl panels, Seiko 43WVF1G panels, Faraday TVE200 TV encoders, Rockchip LVDS controllers, Silicon Image SiI9234 HDMI/MHL bridges, and Raspberry Pi 7-inch touchscreen panels. 
  * **Industrial I/O** : Maxim Integrated DS4422/DS4424 DACs, RF Digital RFD77402 time-of-flight sensors, and Texas Instruments 8/10/12-bit 2/4-channel DACs. 
  * **Input** : EETI EXC3000 multi-touch panels, HiDeep touchscreens, and Samsung S6SY761 touchscreen controllers. 
  * **Media** : Sigma Designs SMP86xx IR decoders, Rockchip Raster 2d graphic acceleration units, Sony IMX274 sensors, and Tegra HDMI CEC interfaces. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Maxim MAX6621 temperature sensors, Maxim MAX31785 fan controllers, TI SDHCI controllers, Amlogic Meson6/Meson8/Meson8b SD/MMC host controllers, Amlogic Meson GPIO interrupt multiplexers, Socionext external interrupt units, STMicroelectronics STM32 DMA multiplexers, STMicroelectronics STM32 master DMA controllers, Spreadtrum DMA controllers, PC Engines APU/APU2 LED controllers, HiSilicon STB PCIe host bridges, V3 Semiconductor PCI controllers, Intel Cherry Trail Dollar Cove TI power-management ICs, Spreadtrum SC27xx power-management ICs, and Texas Instruments DP83822 network PHYs. 
  * **USB** : TI TPS6598x USB power delivery controllers and Broadcom STB USB PHYs. 
  * The legacy Open Sound System audio drivers have been disabled since 4.12; as of 4.15, they have been removed entirely. 
  * The new LED activity trigger mechanism can use an attached LED to indicate the level of CPU activity in the system. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * There are a couple of new helper scripts for people working on the documentation. `find-unused-docs.sh` will look for kerneldoc comments to exported functions that are not actually used in the formatted documentation. `documentation-file-ref-check` can be used to find references to nonexistent files in the documentation. 
  * The regmap framework now has support for using hardware spinlocks to control access to registers. 
  * The s390 architecture has gained [alternatives](/Articles/164121/) support, allowing the kernel to patch itself at boot time to use newer instructions when they are available. 
  * The lockdep [crossrelease mechanism](/Articles/709849/) was disabled in 4.14 due to various problems; those have been fixed and crossrelease is available once again in 4.15. 
  * The new `down_read_killable()` helper will attempt to take a reader/writer semaphore for read access while keeping the process killable by user space. 
  * Work toward getting rid of `ACCESS_ONCE()` continues; code should use `READ_ONCE()` or `WRITE_ONCE()` instead. 
  * There is a new timer function: 
        
        int timer_reduce(struct timer_list *timer, unsigned long expires);
        

It will (1) start the timer if it is not currently running, and (2) set the expiration to `expires` if `expires` is sooner than the current value. 
  * The [kmemcheck](/Articles/260068/) memory-usage debugging tool has been removed from the kernel; it has been superseded by tools like KASAN. 
  * The `__GFP_COLD` memory-allocation flag, used to request a cache-cold page, has been removed. It wasn't properly implemented anyway, and the benefits from using it were far from clear. 




#### Conclusion

Additionally, of the 8,861 changesets merged so far, 300 mention `timer_setup()`, making them part of the ongoing [timer API change](/Articles/735887/). There are also 57 patches adding [SPDX identifiers](/Articles/739183/). 

By the normal schedule, the 4.15 merge window would end on November 26, with the final 4.15 release happening in mid-January. But, as mentioned above, the Thanksgiving holiday could change things, causing the merge window to be either shorter or longer than usual. However it plays out, LWN will run a followup article covering the rest of this merge window.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.15](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.15)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
