# Restricting automatic kernel-module loading [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
December 4, 2017
The kernel's module mechanism allows the building of a kernel with a wide
range of hardware and software support without requiring that all of that
code actually be loaded into any given running system.  The availability of all of
those modules in a typical distributor kernel means that a lot of features
are available — but also, potentially, a lot of exploitable bugs.  There
have been numerous cases where the kernel's automatic module loader has
been used to bring buggy code into a running system.  An attempt to reduce
the kernel's exposure to buggy modules shows how difficult some kinds of
hardening work can be.
Module autoloading
There are two ways in which a module can be loaded into the kernel without
explicit action on the administrator's part.  On most contemporary systems,
it happens when hardware is discovered, either by a bus driver (on buses
that support discovery) or from an external description like a device tree.
Discovery causes an event to be sent to user space, where a daemon like
udev
applies whatever policies have been configured and loads the
appropriate modules.  This mechanism is driven by the available hardware
and is relatively hard for an attacker to influence.
Within the kernel, though, lurks an older mechanism, in the form of the
request_module()
function.  When a kernel function determines that
a needed module is missing, it can call
request_module()
to send a
request to user space to load the module in question.  For example, if an
application opens a char device with a given major and minor number and no
driver exists for those numbers,
the
char device code
will attempt to locate a driver by calling:
request_module("char-major-%d-%d", MAJOR(dev), MINOR(dev));
If a driver module has declared an alias with matching numbers, it will be
automatically loaded into the kernel to handle the open request.
There are hundreds of
request_module()
calls in the kernel.  Some
are quite specific; one will load the
ide-tape
module should the
user be 
unfortunate enough to have such a device.  Others are more general; there
are many calls in the networking subsystem, for example, to locate modules
implementing specific network protocols or packet-filtering mechanisms.
While the device-specific calls have been mostly supplanted by the
udev
mechanism, modules for features like network protocols still
rely on
request_module()
for user-transparent automatic loading.
Autoloading makes for convenient system administration, but it can also
make for convenient system exploitation.  The
DCCP protocol vulnerability
disclosed in
February, for example, is not exploitable if the DCCP module is not loaded
in the kernel — which is normally the case, since DCCP has few users.  But
the autoloading mechanism allows any user to force that module to be loaded
simply by creating a DCCP socket.  Autoloading thus widens the kernel's
attack surface to include anything in a module that unprivileged users can
cause to be loaded — and there are a
lot
of modules in a typical
distributor kernel.
Tightening the system
Djalal Harouni has been working on a patch set aimed at reducing the
exposure from autoloading; the
most recent
version
was posted on November 27.  Harouni's work takes
inspiration from the hardening found in the grsecurity patch set, but takes
no code from there.  In this incarnation (it has changed somewhat over
time), it adds a new sysctl knob
(
/proc/sys/kernel/modules_autoload_mode
) that can be used to
restrict the kernel's autoloading mechanism.  If this knob is set to zero
(the default), autoloading works as it does in current kernels.  Setting it
to one restricts autoloading to processes with specific capabilities:
processes with
CAP_SYS_MODULE
can cause any module to be loaded,
while those with
CAP_NET_ADMIN
can autoload any module whose alias
starts with
netdev-
.  Setting this knob to two disables
autoloading entirely.  Once this value has been raised above zero, it
cannot be lowered during the lifetime of the system.
The patch set also implements a per-process flag that could be set with
the
prctl()
system call.  This flag (which takes the same values as the global flag)
could restrict autoloading for a specific process 
and all of its descendants without changing module-loading behavior in the
system overall.
It is safe to say that this patch set will not be merged in its current
form for a simple reason: Linus Torvalds strongly disliked it.  Disabling
autoloading is likely to break a lot of systems, meaning that distributors
will be unwilling to enable this option and it will not see much use.
"
A security option that people can't use without breaking their
system 
is pointless
", he
said
.  The
discussion got heated at times, but Torvalds is not opposed to the idea of
reducing the kernel's exposure to autoloaded vulnerabilities.  It was just
a matter of finding the right solution.
The per-process flag looks like it could be a part of that solution.  It
could be used, for example, to restrict autoloading for code running within
a container while leaving the system as a whole unchanged.  It is not
uncommon to create a process within a container with the
CAP_NET_ADMIN
capability to configure that container's networking
while wanting most of the code running in the container to be unable to
force module loading.
But, Torvalds said, a single flag will
never be able to properly control all of the situations where autoloading
comes into play.  Some modules should perhaps always be loadable, while
others may need a specific capability.  So he suggested retaining the
request_module_cap()
function added by Harouni's patch set (which
performs the load only if a specific capability is present) and using it
more widely.  But he did have a couple of changes to request.
The first is that
request_module_cap()
shouldn't actually block
module loading if the needed capability is absent — at least not
initially.  Instead, it should log a message.  That will allow a study of
where module autoloading is actually needed that would, with luck,
point out the places where autoloading could be restricted without breaking
existing systems.  He also
suggested
that
the capability check is too simplistic.  For example, the
"
char-major-
" autoload described above only happens if a process
is able to open a device node with the given major and minor numbers.  In
such cases, a permission test (the ability to open that special file) has
already been passed and the module should load unconditionally.  So there
may need to be other variants of
request_module()
to describe
settings where capabilities do not apply.
Finally, Torvalds had
another idea
related
to the idea that the worst bugs tend to lurk in modules that are poorly
maintained at best.  The DCCP module mentioned above, for example, is known
to be little used and nearly unmaintained.  If the modules that
are
well maintained were marked with a special flag, it might be possible to
restrict unprivileged autoloading to those modules only.  That would
prevent the autoloading of some of the cruftier modules while not breaking
autoloading 
in general.  This idea does raise one question that nobody asked, though:
when a module ceases being maintained, who will maintain it well enough to
remove the "well maintained" flag?
In any case, that flag will probably not be added right away, if
this proposed plan
from Kees Cook holds.  He
suggested starting with the
request_module_cap()
approach with
warnings enabled.  The per-process flag would be added for those who can
use it, but the global knob to restrict autoloading would not.  Eventually
it might be possible to get rid of unprivileged module loading, but that
will be a goal for the future.  The short-term benefit would be better
information about how autoloading is actually used and the per-process
option for administrators who want to tighten things down now.
This conversation highlights one of the fundamental tensions that can be
found around kernel hardening work.  Few people are opposed to a more
secure kernel, but things get much more difficult as soon as the hardening
work can break existing systems — and that is often the case.
Security-oriented developers often get frustrated with the kernel
community's resistance to hardening changes with user-visible impacts,
while kernel 
developers have little sympathy for changes that will lead to bug reports
and unhappy users.  Some of those frustrations surfaced in this discussion,
but most of the developers involved were mostly interested in converging on
a solution that works for everybody involved.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Modules
Kernel
Security/Kernel hardening
Security
Linux kernel/Hardening
to post comments