# MAP_FIXED_SAFE [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 13, 2017 

The `MAP_FIXED` option to the [`mmap()` system call](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mmap.2.html) allows a process to specify that a mapping should be placed at a given virtual address if at all possible. It turns out, though, that "if at all possible" can involve a bit more collateral damage than some would like, and can even lead to exploitable vulnerabilities. A new, safer option is in the works but, as is often the case, it has run into a bit of non-technical difficulty. 

Any `mmap()` call allows the calling process to specify an address for the mapping. In normal operation, though, this address is simply a hint that the kernel is free to ignore. `MAP_FIXED` exists for cases where the mapping really has to be placed at the requested address or the application will fail to work. The kernel takes this flag seriously, to the point that, if there is already another mapping in the given address range, the existing mapping will be destroyed to make room for the new one. This seems like a strange semantic; if an application wants a mapping at a given area, it should probably be able to take responsibility for making room for that mapping. But `mmap()` is specified to work that way, so that is what happens. 

Needless to say, that can be problematic if the application wasn't aware of the conflicting mapping — something that could occur as the result of a bug, address-space layout randomization, disagreements between libraries, or deliberate manipulation by an attacker. The data contained within that mapping (or the overlapping part of it, at least) will be silently dropped on the floor and the new mapping will show up in its place. The chances of things working correctly after that are likely to be fairly small. In some cases, security vulnerabilities can result; see, for example, [CVE-2017-1000253](https://www.qualys.com/2017/09/26/linux-pie-cve-2017-1000253/cve-2017-1000253.txt). In that case, the kernel's internal use of `MAP_FIXED` to load programs into memory was exploited to corrupt the stack. 

A solution can be found in Michal Hocko's [`MAP_FIXED_SAFE` patch set](/Articles/741335/). It adds a new `mmap()` flag called, surprisingly, `MAP_FIXED_SAFE` with semantics similar to `MAP_FIXED` with one exception: the operation will fail if the targeted address range is not free. The kernel's ELF loader is modified to use this new flag when mapping programs into memory; that will cause program loading to fail if two mappings collide, but that is better than the alternative. It is expected that new code would use this new flag in almost all cases, and that older programs would eventually be switched as well. 

Some had suggested adding a separate flag to modify the behavior of `MAP_FIXED`, so that applications would pass something like `MAP_FIXED|MAP_SAFE` to `mmap()`. The problem with that approach is that `mmap()` is one of those system calls that never checked for unknown flags. A program using that construction would, as a result, silently fall back to `MAP_FIXED` on older kernels that lacked support for the new `MAP_SAFE` flag. Using a new flag means that, while the application will not get the desired failure status on an older kernel if the address range is not available, it also will not clobber any existing mappings (because the specified address will be treated as a hint by the kernel). 

This change is pretty much ready to go, and Hocko has requested that it be merged. There is, however, the vital issue which has caused the most discussion about this patch series: the naming of `MAP_FIXED_SAFE`. For various reasons, various developers wanted a different name. Suggestions included [`MAP_FIXED_UNIQUE`](/Articles/741375/), [`MAP_FIXED_NOREPLACE`](/Articles/741376/), [`MAP_FIXED_NO_CLOBBER`](/Articles/741377/), [`MAP_TANTRUM`](/Articles/741378/), [`MAP_EXACT`](/Articles/741379/), [`MAP_NOFORCE`](/Articles/741380/), and quite a few others. It was just the sort of discussion that results when the technical issues are resolved, but everybody wants to put their stamp on the final result. 

After enduring a fair amount of that discussion, Hocko made his own decision on the naming: 

I am afraid we can bikeshed this to death and there will still be somebody finding yet another better name. Therefore I've decided to stick with my original MAP_FIXED_SAFE. Why? Well, because it keeps the MAP_FIXED prefix which should be recognized by developers and _SAFE suffix should also be clear that all dangerous side effects of the old MAP_FIXED are gone. 

He also stated that anybody who was truly unhappy with the name was welcome to block the patch and somehow build a consensus around a better one, but that he was done with it. So, naturally, somebody [objected](/Articles/741381/), and Hocko [wished him luck](/Articles/741382/) carrying the patch set forward. 

Given the personalities involved, one might think that a useful patch will end up simply blocked at this point. Your editor would wager, though, that the `MAP_FIXED_SAFE` patches will be merged in something close to their current form. They address a real problem; holding them up while waiting for the perfect name does not seem like an approach that will do anybody any good.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Memory management](/Kernel/Index#Memory_management)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
