# 4.16 Merge window part 1 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
February 2, 2018 

As of this writing, just over 6,700 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 4.16 development cycle. Given that there are a number of significant trees yet to be pulled, the early indications are that 4.16 will be yet another busy development cycle. What follows is a summary of the significant changes merged in the first half of this merge window. 

#### Core kernel

  * Initial support for the [Jailhouse hypervisor](https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse) has been added for the x86-64 architecture. With this support, it's possible to run Linux in a non-root cell. 
  * The deadline scheduler has been given an understanding of CPU frequency and voltage scaling; that allows it to operate properly without the need to disable power-saving features. 
  * The arm64 architecture can now work with 52-bit physical addresses on suitably equipped hardware. 
  * The Berkeley Packet Filter (BPF) virtual machine now has [support](https://git.kernel.org/linus/ef9fde06a259f5da660ada63214addf8cd86a7b9) for the defining and calling of functions within BPF programs. 



> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

#### Filesystems and block layer

  * The MultiMediaCard subsystem (which handles storage devices like Secure Digital cards) has been reworked to use the [multiqueue block API](/Articles/552904/). That should bring performance improvements among other benefits. 

  * The I/O schedulers have gained support for locked zones on block devices; this is used to prevent reordering of writes on zoned devices where writes must be performed sequentially. 

  * The CIFS filesystem has experimental support for SMB Direct, which can use remote DMA (RDMA) to transfer SMB packets. 

  * The Btrfs filesystem now supports the [`fallocate()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/fallocate.2.html) `FALLOCATE_FL_ZERO_RANGE` operation. 

  * The NFS client can now use the query flags in the `[statx()](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/statx.2.html)` system call to avoid calling to the remote server if the needed information is available locally. 

  * The new `RWF_APPEND` flag to `[pwritev2()](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/preadv2.2.html)` will append the data to the file regardless of the current offset. 




#### Networking

  * The new "netdevsim" virtual device exists to help in the testing of hardware-offload features in the networking stack. It simulates various offload operations so that higher-level code can be tested without the relevant hardware being present. The initial use case is for testing BPF offload support. 

  * The Netware IPX and NCPFS protocol implementations are old, unmaintained, and unused; they have been moved to the staging tree ahead of their eventual deletion from the kernel. 




#### Security-related

  * The arm64 architecture has gained the ability to invalidate the branch prediction unit, a defense against the Spectre variant-2 vulnerability. Also added to arm64 is kernel page-table isolation to defend against Meltdown. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Audio** : Texas Instruments PCM186x and TLV320AIC32x4 codecs, Texas Instruments TAS6424 quad-channel audio amplifiers, Maxim integrated MAX98373 speaker amplifiers, STMicroelectronics STM32 DFSDM digital audio interfaces, Tempo Semiconductor TSCS42xx codecs, and Socionext UniPhier LD11/20 codecs. 
  * **Bus** : Eckelmann SIOX buses, SLIMbus buses, Qualcomm SLIMbus controllers, and SoundWire two-pin buses. 
  * **Cryptographic** : STMicroelectronics STM32 CRYP1 cryptographic accelerators, Chelsio IPSec XFRM Tx crypto offload engines, and Samsung Exynos true random number generators. 
  * **Industrial I/O** : IDT ZOPT2201 ALS and UV B sensors and STMicroelectronics UVIS25 UV sensors. 
  * **Networking** : Hisilicon HNS3VF network acceleration engines, MediaTek MT76x2E wireless network interfaces, Socionext AVE Ethernet interfaces, SocioNext NetSec gigabit Ethernet controllers, and Cortina Gemini Ethernet controllers. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Realtek rts5260 card readers, RAVE supervisory processor units, Nuvoton W83773G hardware-monitoring chips, Spreadtrum SC2731 power regulators, Texas Instruments DDR3 ECC controllers, Texas Instruments LM3692x LED controllers, Winbond Super I/O GPIO controllers, and Oracle SPARC data analytics accelerators. 
  * The LED subsystem has a new trigger type (`NETDEV`) that can trigger an LED based on network activity. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The handling of the inode `i_version` field has changed to eliminate changes (which must be expensively flushed to storage) when nobody is paying attention. There is a new API (found in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/ae5e165d855dd978a461b22175531b07f54fb61f)) for working with `i_version`. 
  * High-resolution timer (hrtimer) functions have traditionally run in hard-interrupt context. Many users actually need to be running in software-interrupt context, though, leading to a situation where a lot of hrtimer functions do nothing except start a tasklet to get the real work done. 4.16 adds two new timer modes (`HRTIMER_MODE_REL_SOFT` and `HRTIMER_MODE_ABS_SOFT`) that run the timer function in software-interrupt context to begin with, eliminating the need for the tasklet. 
  * The return type of the `poll()` method in `struct file_operations` has been changed to the new `__poll_t` type. It is a bitwise type that facilitates automatic checking for a number of common mistakes in `poll()` implementations. 
  * The new `snap-pkg` target in the build system can be used to create a Snap package containing a built kernel. 
  * The parser used by the configuration system is now directly generated with `flex` and `bison`; those tools are thus now part of the kernel's build requirements. 



The 4.16 merge window will probably close on February 11; the final 4.16 kernel release can, barring another significant security surprise, be expected on April 1 or 8. Stay tuned for the second article in this series, which will cover the second half of the merge window for this development cycle.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.16](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.16)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
