# The rest of the 4.16 merge window [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
February 12, 2018 

At [the close of the 4.16 merge window](/Articles/747069/), 11,746 non-merge changesets had been merged; that is 5,000 since [last week's summary](/Articles/746129/). This merge window is thus a busy one, though not out of line with its predecessors — 4.14 had 11,500 changesets during its merge window, while 4.15 had 12,599. Quite a bit of that work is of the boring internal variety; over 600 of those changesets were device-tree updates, for example. But there was still a fair amount of interesting work merged in the second half of the 4.16 merge window; read on for the highlights.   


#### Architecture-specific

  * The PowerPC architecture now has support for [memory-protection keys](/Articles/689395/). 



#### Core kernel

  * The [expedited option](/Articles/728795/) has been added to the [`membarrier()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/membarrier.2.html) system call. The API has changed somewhat since it was last discussed, though. At that time, there was a concern about not perturbing processes that did not need to participate in any given barrier operation, and some complex schemes for figuring out which processes to include. The merged patches, though, create an opt-in mechanism for processes that want to participate in "global" barrier operations. Opting in is a matter of calling `membarrier()` with the concise and easy-to-type `MEMBARRIER_CMD_REGISTER_GLOBAL_EXPEDITED` command. An expedited barrier can be sent to all registered processes with `MEMBARRIER_CMD_GLOBAL_EXPEDITED`. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * Overlay filesystems using overlayfs can now be exported via NFS. Enabling this functionality changes some overlayfs behavior and can create a filesystem that is not backward compatible; see the documentation in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/f168f1098dd9038daaf9f7be5f81cdea4985886a) and [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a01f64b5c06ca1130b0b72ceb5e2a25e4d37ab08) for details. 
  * The XFS reverse-mapping feature is no longer marked as being experimental. 
  * The AFS filesystem has "dynamic root" support; see [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/4d673da14533b32fe8d3125b5b7be4fea14e39a8) for more information. 



#### Miscellaneous

  * The new `console_msg_format` command-line option can be used to adjust the formatting of `printk()` output. In particular, setting it to `syslog` will cause a syslog-like format to be generated. 
  * Virtualization with KVM now supports AMD's [secure encrypted virtualization (SEV)](/Articles/699820/) feature. 



#### Security-related

  * The [usercopy whitelisting](/Articles/727322/) patch set has been merged. This mechanism further reduces the ranges of memory that can be copied to or from user space; now specific fields of a slab-allocated structure can be whitelisted. After some discussion, the current configuration will only issue a warning (rather than oopsing the system) if non-whitelisted memory is copied; the intent is to find and fix any problems without actually breaking the kernel when those problems occur. When the developers are confident that all of the issues have been found, that behavior may change in a more unforgiving direction. 

Anybody wanting stricter behavior now can disable the `HARDENED_USERCOPY_FALLBACK` configuration option or set the `slab_common.usercopy_fallback` command-line option to zero. 
  * Initial mitigations for Spectre variant 1 (bounds-check bypass) have been merged; see [this article](/Articles/746551/) for details. The core of this support is a new `array_index_nospec()` macro that prevents speculation that might cause a bounds check to be circumvented. 
  * The arm64 architecture has gained another set of Meltdown/Spectre mitigations. The `array_index_nospec()` operator is supported natively, and it has been applied in a few places in the kernel. Branch-predictor hardening has been improved as well. 
  * S390 has also gained an implementation of `array_index_nospec()`, support for some new instructions to control branch prediction, and a variant on the retpoline concept called an "expoline". 




#### Hardware support

  * **Clock** : Hisilicon Hi3660 stub clocks, Spreadtrum SC9860 clocks, Qualcomm MSM8916 APCS clock controllers, AmLogic A113D clock controllers, and Freescale MXC realtime clocks. 
  * **Pin control** Meson AXG pin-control units, STMicroelectronics STM32MP157 and STM32F769 pin controllers, MediaTek MT7622 pin control units, Microsemi Ocelot pin control units, and Qualcomm MSM8998 pin controllers. 
  * **Media** : NXP TDA18250 silicon tuners, NVIDIA Tegra video decoder engines, Intel IPU3 CIO2 CSI-2 receivers, and OmniVision OV7740 sensors. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Ilitek ILI9225 and ILI9322 display panels, OpenCAPI coherent accelerators, Cadence PCIe host controllers, Realtek RTD119x/RTD129x watchdog timers, and Spreadtrum watchdog timers. 
  * The old-style LIRC infrared controller drivers, having languished in staging for the requisite number of cycles, have now been removed from the kernel. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The way that `printk()` handles large amounts of message traffic [has been changed](/Articles/737822/). It will now spread the work over multiple CPUs, reducing the possibility of locking up a CPU with constant message traffic. 
  * The i2c-gpio fault injector can be used to create "unusual states" on the I2C bus to test the other side's error handling; see [Documentation/i2c/gpio-fault-injection](/Articles/746798/) for details. 



Barring a Meltdown-style security issue or some other problem of that magnitude, the final 4.16 release can be expected in early April. As always, though, there is a lot of testing and fixing to be done between now and then.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.16](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.16)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
