# Some 4.16 and -stable development statistics [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 26, 2018 

The 4.16 development cycle is shaping up to be a relatively straightforward affair with little in the way of known problems and a probable release after nine weeks of work. In comparison to the wild ride that was 4.15, 4.16 looks positively calm. Even so, there is a lot that has happened this time around; read on for a look at who contributed to this release, with a brief digression into stable kernel updates. 

As of this writing, 1,774 developers have contributed 13,439 non-merge changesets during the 4.16 development cycle. That work grew the kernel by about 195,000 lines overall. By recent standards, 4.16 is a relatively calm cycle, and certainly calmer than the 14,866-changeset 4.15 cycle. Still, that is quite a bit of work to integrate in nine weeks. 

The most active developers in the 4.16 cycle were: 

> Most active 4.16 developers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> Arnd Bergmann| 184| 1.4%  
> Chris Wilson| 184| 1.4%  
> Colin Ian King| 163| 1.2%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 131| 1.0%  
> Jakub Kicinski| 122| 0.9%  
> Russell King| 114| 0.8%  
> Gilad Ben-Yossef| 114| 0.8%  
> Hans de Goede| 108| 0.8%  
> Al Viro| 105| 0.8%  
> Markus Elfring| 105| 0.8%  
> Christoph Hellwig| 100| 0.7%  
> Eric Biggers| 96| 0.7%  
> Christian König| 94| 0.7%  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 92| 0.7%  
> Ville Syrjälä| 84| 0.6%  
> Masahiro Yamada| 83| 0.6%  
> Andy Shevchenko| 82| 0.6%  
> Geert Uytterhoeven| 80| 0.6%  
> Darrick J. Wong| 78| 0.6%  
> Thierry Reding| 77| 0.6%  
> | By changed lines  
> ---  
> Feifei Xu| 68942| 10.0%  
> Andi Kleen| 18156| 2.6%  
> Tomer Tayar| 13758| 2.0%  
> Felix Fietkau| 10056| 1.5%  
> Mauro Carvalho Chehab| 8674| 1.3%  
> Michael Chan| 7021| 1.0%  
> Gilad Ben-Yossef| 7010| 1.0%  
> Hans de Goede| 6849| 1.0%  
> Linus Walleij| 6821| 1.0%  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 6772| 1.0%  
> Thierry Reding| 6761| 1.0%  
> Tony Lindgren| 6533| 0.9%  
> Tero Kristo| 6271| 0.9%  
> Jakub Kicinski| 6261| 0.9%  
> Masahiro Yamada| 6000| 0.9%  
> Sean Young| 5148| 0.7%  
> Russell King| 4988| 0.7%  
> Vinod Koul| 4878| 0.7%  
> Miquel Raynal| 4751| 0.7%  
> Frederic Barrat| 4717| 0.7%  
  
> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

Arnd Bergmann made improvements all over the tree, fixing year-2038 issues, compiler warnings, and more. Chris Wilson made a long list of changes to the Intel i915 graphics driver, Colin Ian King contributed many cleanup patches, Mauro Carvalho Chehab worked mostly in the media subsystem (of which he is the maintainer), and Jakub Kicinski worked extensively in the networking and BPF subsystems. 

In the "lines changed" column, Feifei Xu topped the list by cleaning up some AMD graphics driver header files, removing 58,000 lines of code in the process. Andi Kleen updated perf events data for several Intel processors, Tomer Tayer made a number of changes to the QLogic Ethernet and SCSI drivers, and Felix Fietkau worked mainly on the new mt76 network driver. 

Work on 4.16 was supported by 230 employers that we were able to identify, a fairly typical number for recent development cycles. The most active companies this time around were: 

> Most active 4.16 employers  
> ---  
> | By changesets  
> ---  
> Intel| 1424| 10.6%  
> Red Hat| 971| 7.2%  
> (Unknown)| 962| 7.2%  
> (None)| 895| 6.7%  
> AMD| 677| 5.0%  
> IBM| 566| 4.2%  
> Linaro| 524| 3.9%  
> Renesas Electronics| 373| 2.8%  
> Mellanox| 366| 2.7%  
> Google| 365| 2.7%  
> SUSE| 337| 2.5%  
> (Consultant)| 333| 2.5%  
> ARM| 328| 2.4%  
> Oracle| 320| 2.4%  
> Huawei Technologies| 295| 2.2%  
> Samsung| 272| 2.0%  
> Texas Instruments| 233| 1.7%  
> Broadcom| 201| 1.5%  
> Netronome Systems| 192| 1.4%  
> Canonical| 185| 1.4%  
> | By lines changed  
> ---  
> AMD| 97644| 14.2%  
> Intel| 73566| 10.7%  
> (Unknown)| 33700| 4.9%  
> Red Hat| 33027| 4.8%  
> (None)| 31155| 4.5%  
> IBM| 26329| 3.8%  
> Linaro| 25245| 3.7%  
> (Consultant)| 20772| 3.0%  
> Cavium| 18173| 2.6%  
> Samsung| 16587| 2.4%  
> ARM| 16368| 2.4%  
> Broadcom| 13868| 2.0%  
> Texas Instruments| 13597| 2.0%  
> Code Aurora Forum| 13437| 2.0%  
> Oracle| 13335| 1.9%  
> Bootlin| 13038| 1.9%  
> Mellanox| 12999| 1.9%  
> Google| 12281| 1.8%  
> Huawei Technologies| 11781| 1.7%  
> ST Microelectronics| 9672| 1.4%  
  
As usual, there are few surprises here. While a lot of companies support work on the Linux kernel, the list of companies that contribute the most work remains pretty steady from one development cycle to the next. 

As can be seen here, the 4.16 cycle in general was short on surprises; it can be seen as a sort of return to normal after the ups and downs of 4.15 brought about by the response to the Meltdown and Spectre vulnerabilities. At this point, most of the work to deal with those issues has been done, so the kernel community has gone back to work producing ordinary releases. 

#### Some stable statistics

There have been a lot of relatively large stable kernel updates in recent times; it appears that the pace of fixes going into the stable trees has increased. Curious as to whether that was true or not, your editor crunched some numbers from stable kernel repository on kernel.org, which contains the history of most of the stable kernel releases; the results looked like this: 

> Stable kernel update activity since 3.0  
> ---  
> ![\[Stable updates
plot\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2018/stable-updates.svg) | ![\[Stable changesets
plot\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2018/stable-csets.svg)  
  
A few things do stand out from those charts. The 3.x era saw quite a few kernels receive extended maintenance, often with various distributors maintaining kernels that only they shipped. Over the last couple of years, that pattern has evened out to one kernel release per year. The policy of identifying the long-term-stable releases ahead of time and getting distributors to base their work on those releases appears to be paying off. 

The number of changesets applied to stable kernels does seem to have grown a bit over time. The 4.15 kernel has received nearly 1,100 changesets already, and it's only been out for a couple of months. 4.14, which is a long-term release, has received nearly 2,900 fixes since its release on November 12. Some of the numbers for older releases are impressive as well; 4.9 has received 6,600 fixes, while 3.2 has gotten nearly 8,800. That is a lot of changes going into "stable" kernels. 

One interesting reason for all of these fixes is a more aggressive effort to identify fixes that should go into the stable trees, even if the developers of those fixes and the maintainers who merge them didn't identify them as such. That includes a semi-automated component that Greg Kroah-Hartman [described this way](/Articles/750057/): 

Seriously, it's close to magic, there's a tool that Sasha [Levin] is using that takes "machine learning" to match patches that we have not applied in stable kernels to ones that we have, and try to catch those that we forgot to tag for the stable tree. Not all subsystems mark stable patches, so this is an attempt to catch those fixes that should be getting backported but are not either because the developer/maintainer forgot to mark it as such, or because they just never mark those types of patches. 

If anybody has wondered why they have to plow through vast numbers of "AUTOSEL" messages in the linux-kernel list, this is why. The mailing-list traffic may be annoying to the few of us who still follow linux-kernel, but many of the fixes identified by this tool are being backported as far as 3.2 and made available to users. That said, it is worth noting that some developers [are not entirely comfortable](/Articles/750106/) with the amount of backporting that is being done. 

The 4.4-stable series has seen 124 releases as of this writing. Here is a summary of where the 7,575 fixes applied to 4.4 came from: 

> Source of 4.4-stable patches  
> ---  
> | Developers  
> ---  
> Arnd Bergmann| 202| 2.7%  
> Takashi Iwai| 167| 2.2%  
> Greg Kroah-Hartman| 163| 2.2%  
> Johan Hovold| 144| 1.9%  
> Eric Dumazet| 125| 1.7%  
> Alex Deucher| 76| 1.0%  
> Dan Carpenter| 73| 1.0%  
> Al Viro| 70| 0.9%  
> Thomas Gleixner| 59| 0.8%  
> Eric Biggers| 56| 0.7%  
> James Hogan| 54| 0.7%  
> Andy Lutomirski| 49| 0.7%  
> Herbert Xu| 42| 0.6%  
> Nicholas Bellinger| 42| 0.6%  
> Florian Westphal| 41| 0.5%  
> Steven Rostedt| 39| 0.5%  
> Jan Kara| 38| 0.5%  
> Alan Stern| 37| 0.5%  
> Tejun Heo| 36| 0.5%  
> Trond Myklebust| 35| 0.5%  
> | Employers  
> ---  
> Red Hat| 788| 10.5%  
> (None)| 608| 8.1%  
> Intel| 557| 7.4%  
> Google| 504| 6.7%  
> SUSE| 478| 6.4%  
> (Unknown)| 461| 6.2%  
> Linaro| 354| 4.7%  
> IBM| 317| 4.2%  
> (Consultant)| 217| 2.9%  
> Oracle| 205| 2.7%  
> Linux Foundation| 197| 2.6%  
> AMD| 166| 2.2%  
> ARM| 141| 1.9%  
> Imagination Technologies| 135| 1.8%  
> Mellanox| 101| 1.4%  
> Canonical| 100| 1.3%  
> Samsung| 91| 1.2%  
> Facebook| 85| 1.1%  
> Broadcom| 76| 1.0%  
> Linutronix| 74| 1.0%  
  
All of this activity in the stable trees makes it clear that the development of a kernel release doesn't stop when Linus Torvalds declares it ready and moves on. By the time a kernel release gets to users, it will likely have had thousands of fixes applied to it. Efforts within the community to get vendors to use the long-term stable kernels appear to be paying off, so more of those fixes are actually reaching the users that need them, which can only be a good thing.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.16](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.16)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
