# Finding Spectre vulnerabilities with smatch [LWN.net]

> **Ready to give LWN a try?**
> 
> With a subscription to LWN, you can stay current with what is happening in the Linux and free-software community and take advantage of subscriber-only site features. We are pleased to offer you **[a free trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-trial/claim)** , no credit card required, so that you can see for yourself. Please, join us! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
April 20, 2018 

The furor over the Meltdown and Spectre vulnerabilities has calmed a bit — for now, at least — but that does not mean that developers have stopped worrying about them. Spectre variant 1 (the bounds-check bypass vulnerability) has been of particular concern because, while the kernel is thought to contain numerous vulnerable spots, nobody really knows how to find them all. As a result, the defenses that have been developed for variant 1 have only been deployed in a few places. Recently, though, Dan Carpenter has [enhanced](/Articles/752409/) the [smatch](/Articles/691882/) tool to enable it to find possibly vulnerable code in the kernel. 

Spectre variant 1 is the result of the processor incorrectly predicting the results of a bounds check; it then speculatively executes code with a parameter (such as an array index) that falls outside of its allowed range. This problem can be [mitigated](/Articles/746551/) by disabling speculative execution in situations where an array index is under the control of a potential attacker. In the kernel, that is done by replacing code like: 
    
    
        value = array[index];
    

with: 
    
    
        index = array_index_nospec(index, ARRAY_SIZE);
        value = array[index];
    

That's the easy part; the hard part is finding the places in the kernel where the `array_index_nospec()` macro should be used. Until now, the only tool available has been the proprietary Coverity checker, which is not accessible to everybody and produces a fair number of false positives. As a result, there are only a handful of `array_index_nospec()` calls in current kernels. 

Carpenter's addition to smatch changes that situation by providing a free tool that can search for potential Spectre variant-1 vulnerabilities. The algorithm is simple enough in concept: 

What the test does is it looks at array accesses where the user controls the offset. It asks "is this a read?" and have we used the array_index_nospec() macro? If the answers are yes, and no respectively then print a warning. 

This test returns a list of about 800 places where `array_index_nospec()` should be used. Carpenter assumes that a large percentage of these are false positives, and has asked for suggestions on how the test could be made more accurate. Instead of offering suggestions, though, both [Thomas Gleixner](/Articles/752410/) and [Peter Zijlstra](/Articles/752411/) confirmed that a number of the reports were accurate; Zijlstra said ""I fear that many are actually things we want to fix"". He followed up with [a patch series](/Articles/752412/) fixing seven of them — nearly doubling the number of `array_index_nospec()` calls in the kernel. 

Once the low-hanging fruit has been tackled, there probably will be a focus on improving the tests in smatch to filter out the inevitable false positives and to be sure that vulnerable sites are not slipping through. But, now that there is a free tool to do this checking, progress in this area can be expected to accelerate. Perhaps it will be possible to find — and fix — many of the existing Spectre vulnerabilities before the attackers get there.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Meltdown and Spectre](/Kernel/Index#Security-Meltdown_and_Spectre)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Meltdown and Spectre](/Security/Index/#Meltdown_and_Spectre)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Static analysis](/Security/Index/#Static_analysis)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
