# Removing the kthread freezer? [LWN.net]

By
Jake Edge
April 25, 2018
LSFMM
Using the kernel thread (kthread) freezer has been a longtime problem
for a variety of reasons.  It is meant as a way to suspend kthreads on the
way toward system suspend, but in practice has proved problematic to the
point that it came up at both the
2015
and
2016
Kernel Summits (as well as on the
mailing lists over the years); the intent is to try
to remove the kthread freezer entirely.  To that end, Luis Rodriguez led a
discussion in the filesystem track of the 2018 Linux Storage, Filesystem,
and Memory-Management Summit on the problems and possible solutions.
Rodriguez has
picked up
the work that Jiri
Kosina was doing to eliminate the kthread freezer, but is moving more
cautiously than Kosina originally planned.  One problem is that
the kernel does not want to freeze kthreads in unexpected places, so there
is a mechanism that allows the threads to block the freezing process.  Part
of the thinking there is that there should not be DMA in flight while the
suspend is going on, Kent Overstreet said.  He asked, wouldn't it be better if the
drivers put themselves in a sane state for suspend?
Dave Chinner said that even if the devices are ready to suspend, the
filesystems can still be making in-memory changes.  A recurring problem
is that suspend would sync a filesystem to make it stable, but the
filesystem would still have threads and work on workqueues that were
operating on the in-memory data.  That led to an inconsistent state between
what was on disk and what was in the memory image used by the suspend.
In general, Rodriguez said, the kernel should not be freezing kthreads.
The threads want full control of where they can be frozen; it is hard to
get it all right if it is imposed on them.  But trying to address this
problem in a generic form is "really hard"; phasing out the kthread freezer
will be difficult, so he suggested a divide-and-conquer approach.
For filesystems that implement the
freeze_fs()
method, it should
be straightforward, but there is still a problem in getting the order
right.  The current mechanism freezes the most recently mounted filesystems
first and thaws them in the order in which they were mounted.  That 
is simple to do using
iterate_supers()
,
but does it work in all cases?
Al Viro said that it does not.  There is a "nasty
ioctl()
", which he
is sorry for implementing, that can break the ordering.  It is quite
possible that a filesystem that was mounted later shows up earlier in the
list.  The ordering described is also not sufficient for FUSE filesystems,
Jan Kara said, though Chinner suggested those simply be skipped in the walk.
But there are filesystems that talk to several devices, such as those
hosted on a RAID
device or with their  journal on a separate device, Viro said.  These
topologies can also change at run time, so he does not recommend relying on
any kind of ordering.
In fact, a directed acyclic graph (DAG) could describe these
relationships, Kara said.  It would have nodes for filesystems and devices,
with edges that describe the dependencies between them.  It would be nice
to build that DAG in the kernel, but it is not done today.  Viro agreed
that it is probably needed at some point.
Rodriguez wondered whether the DAG generation was required before making
any progress on eliminating the kthread freezer.  As long as the existence
of the problem is kept in mind, Viro said, work can proceed.  If these
problem configurations can be detected, suspend could be prohibited for
those systems, Rodriguez said.  But that will be difficult to detect
without the graph, Kara said.
There are a number of problem areas that came up in the discussion: freezing
races with automounting, the control group (cgroup) freezer is "completely
broken", freezing FUSE filesystems is problematic, and so on.  It was noted
that applications would like to know if the filesystem they are using is
about to freeze so they can quiesce their own data to keep it consistent.
Rodriguez was surprised to find out that there is no generic framework for
the kernel to notify user space about an upcoming suspend: "That's insane!"
No real conclusions came out of the discussion.  Rodriguez plans to post
his notes to the mailing list for feedback.  There was also talk about
discussing it more later in the summit, though that has not been scheduled
as of this writing.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Kernel threads
Conference
Storage, Filesystem, and Memory-Management Summit/2018
to post comments