# Using user-space tracepoints with BPF [LWN.net]

May 11, 2018
This article was contributed by
Matt Fleming
BPF in the kernel
Much has been written on LWN about dynamically instrumenting kernel
code. These features are also available to user-space code with a
special kind of probe known as a User Statically-Defined Tracing
(USDT) probe. These probes provide a low-overhead way of 
instrumenting user-space code and provide a convenient way to debug applications
running in production. In this final article of the BPF and BCC series
we'll look at where USDT probes come from and how you can use them to
understand the behavior of your own applications.
The origins of USDT probes can be found in Sun's DTrace utility.
While DTrace can't claim to have invented static tracepoints (various
implementations are described in the
"related
work" 
section
of the
original DTrace
paper
),
it certainly made them much more popular. With the emergence of
DTrace, many applications began adding USDT probes to important
functions to aid with tracing and diagnosing run-time behavior. Given
that, it's perhaps not surprising that these probes are usually
enabled (as part of configuring the build) with the
--enable-dtrace
switch.
For example, MySQL provides a number of
probes
to aid database administrators and to help them understand who is
connecting to the database, which SQL commands they're running, and
low-level details on data transferred between clients and MySQL
servers. Other popular tools such as Java, PostgreSQL, Node.js, and
even the GNU C Library also come with the option of enabling probes. These probes
cover a wide range of activities, from memory allocation to
garbage-collection events.
There is a variety of tools on Linux to work with USDT probes.
SystemTap
is a popular choice and
an alternative to DTrace since it's only recently that
DTrace
has 
been supported on
Linux
.
Support for USDT probes (termed "statically defined traces" inside the
kernel) for perf was
merged
in v4.8-rc1, and even
LTTng
has been able to emit
USDT-compatible
probes
since 2012. The most recent additions to the developer's USDT tool
chest — and arguably the most user-friendly — are the tools and
scripts in the
BPF Compiler
Collection (BCC)
.
BCC tools for working with USDT probes
BCC has had support for USDT probes since March 2016, when Sasha
Goldshtein sent a
pull
request
to the GitHub
project adding support to the existing
tplist
and
trace
tools.
The
tplist
tool allows you to see which probes (if any) are available 
for the kernel, an application, or a library, and it can be used to
discover names of probes to enable with
trace
. 
Running it on a version of the C library compiled with SDT support
shows:
# tplist.py -l /lib64/libc-2.27.so
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:setjmp
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:longjmp
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:longjmp_target
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_mallopt_arena_max
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_mallopt_arena_test
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_tunable_tcache_max_bytes
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_tunable_tcache_count
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_tunable_tcache_unsorted_limit
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_mallopt_trim_threshold
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_mallopt_top_pad
    [ ... ]
The
-l
parameter tells
tplist
that the file argument is a library or
executable. Omitting
-l
instructs
tplist
to print the
list of kernel tracepoints.
A filter can be applied to the list of tracepoints and probes, which
helps to shorten the (potentially very long) default output of
tplist
.
For example, using the filter
sbrk
prints only those probes with
the string "
sbrk
" in their name. And using the
-vv
parameter prints
the arguments available at the probe site.  For example:
./tplist.py -vv -l /lib64/libc-2.27.so sbrk
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_sbrk_less [sema 0x0]
    location #1 0x816dd
    argument #1 8 unsigned bytes @ ax
    argument #2 8 signed   bytes @ bp
    /lib64/libc-2.27.so libc:memory_sbrk_more [sema 0x0]
    location #1 0x826af
    argument #1 8 unsigned bytes @ ax
    argument #2 8 signed   bytes @ r12
The argument details are necessary to understand which registers
contain function parameters. Knowing the location of arguments allows
us to print their contents with the BCC
trace
tool with a command like:
# trace.py 'u:/lib64/libc-2.27.so:memory_sbrk_more "%u", arg1' -T
    TIME     PID     TID     COMM            FUNC             -
    21:46:51 12781   12781   ls              memory_sbrk_more 114974720
The
trace
utility takes a number of arguments and accepts a probe
specifier, an example of which was used above. Probe specifiers allow
users to describe exactly what they want to be printed when the probe
fires. A list of examples (and a more thorough explanation of the
format) is provided in the
trace_example.txt
file in the BCC repository.  The output above shows one hit when a process
running
ls
hit the
memory_sbrk_more
probe.
Additional tools in BCC enable USDT probes for popular high-level
languages like Java, Python, Ruby, and PHP —
lib/calls.py
summarizes method calls,
lib/uflow.py
traces function entry and exit and prints a visual flow graph,
lib/ugc.py
traces garbage-collection events,
lib/uobjnew.py
prints summary statistics for new object allocations, and
lib/uthreads.py
prints details on thread creation.
lib/ustat.py
is a monitoring tool that pulls all of these together and displays
their events with a
top
-like interface:
# ustat.py
    Tracing... Output every 10 secs. Hit Ctrl-C to end
    12:17:17 loadavg: 0.33 0.08 0.02 5/211 26284

    PID    CMDLINE      METHOD/s   GC/s   OBJNEW/s   CLOAD/s  EXC/s  THR/s
    3018   node/node    0          3      0          0        0      0
The output above shows that pid 3018, a
node
process, generated
three garbage collection events within a ten-second period.  Like most of
these scripts,
ustat.py
runs until interrupted by the user.
In addition to the language-specific tools, BCC also includes specialized
scripts for specific applications. For example,
bashreadline.py
prints commands from all running bash shells:
# bashreadline.py
    TIME      PID    COMMAND
    05:28:25  21176  ls -l
    05:28:28  21176  date
    05:28:35  21176  echo hello world
    05:28:43  21176  foo this command failed
    05:28:45  21176  df -h
    05:29:04  3059   echo another shell
    05:29:13  21176  echo first shell again
dbslower.py
prints database (MySQL or PostgreSQL) operations with 
a latency that exceeds a specified threshold:
# dbslower.py mysql -m 1000
    Tracing database queries for pids 25776 slower than 1000 ms...
    TIME(s)        PID          MS QUERY
    1.421264       25776  2002.183 call getproduct(97)
    3.572617       25776  2001.381 call getproduct(97)
    5.661411       25776  2001.867 call getproduct(97)
    7.748296       25776  2001.329 call getproduct(97)
Adding USDT probes to your application
SystemTap provides an API for adding static probes to an
application. To create them, you'll need the
systemtap-sdt-devel
package, which provides the
sys/sdt.h
header file. The documentation for
the SystemTap project provides an
example of adding a
probe
,
but we'll add one to a simple C program and use the BCC tools to list
and enable the probe:
#include <sys/sdt.h>
    #include <sys/time.h>
    #include <unistd.h>

    int main(int argc, char **argv)
    {
        struct timeval tv;

        while(1) {
            gettimeofday(&tv, NULL);
            DTRACE_PROBE1(test-app, test-probe, tv.tv_sec);
            sleep(1);
        }
        return 0;
    }
This simple program runs until interrupted. It fires a
probe and then calls
sleep()
to wait for one second until the loop
starts again. The
DTRACE_PROBE()
macro is used to create probe points
at desired locations, in this case, immediately before sleeping. This macro
takes a provider name, probe name, and arguments as 
parameters. There's a separate
DTRACE_PROBEn()
macro for each argument
count. For example, if your probe has three arguments, you need to use
DTRACE_PROBE3()
.
The
DTRACE_PROBEn()
macros are implemented by placing a no-op assembly
instruction at the 
probe site and writing an ELF note in the application image that
includes things like the probe address and name. Since the runtime overhead of
an inactive probe is the cost of executing a no-op instruction and, given that
the ELF note isn't loaded into memory, the impact on performance is minimal.
The provider name allows you to create a namespace for your probe. The
most common value (and the one suggested in the SystemTap example) is
to use the name of your application or library. In the example above
I've used
test-app
, and the probe name was imaginatively titled,
test-probe
. The one and only argument to the probe is the time in
seconds.
Using tplist, we can see the probe and its argument:
# tplist.py -vv -l ./simple-c
    simple-c test-app:test-probe [sema 0x0]
    location #1 0x40057b
    argument #1 8 signed   bytes @ ax
We can then construct a probe specifier to print the first argument with
trace
, assuming the simple-c program above is running:
# trace.py 'u:./simple-c:test-probe "%u", arg1' -T -p $(pidof simple-c)
    TIME     PID     TID     COMM            FUNC             -
    21:55:44 13450   13450   simple-c        test-probe       1524430544
    21:55:45 13450   13450   simple-c        test-probe       1524430545
    21:55:46 13450   13450   simple-c        test-probe       1524430546
The final column in the output shows the current time, in seconds,
when the probe fires. This is information passed as the first argument
in the probe declaration. You do need to be aware of the data type of
the probe arguments, since it is reflected in the
printf()
-style format
string used in the probe specifier.
Conclusion
USDT probes bring the flexibility of kernel tracepoints to user-space
applications. Thanks to the rise of DTrace, many popular applications
and high-level programming languages grew support for USDT probes. BCC
provides simple tools for working with probes that allow developers to
list available probes in libraries and applications, and trace them to
print diagnostic data. Adding probes to your own code is possible with
SystemTap's API and the collection of
DTRACE_PROBE()
macros. USDT
probes can help you troubleshoot your applications in production with
minimal run-time overhead.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
BPF/Tracing
Kernel
Tracing/with BPF
GuestArticles
Fleming, Matt
to post comments