# 4.18 Merge window, part 1 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 8, 2018 

As of this writing, 7,515 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 4.18 merge window. Things are clearly off to a strong start. The changes pulled this time around include more than the usual number of interesting new features; read on for the details.   


#### Architecture-specific

  * The 32-bit ARM architecture has gained fixes for Spectre variants 1 and 2. 
  * 32-Bit x86 systems now have a just-in-time compiler for eBPF programs. 



#### Core kernel

  * There is [a new polling interface](/Articles/743714/) for use with asynchronous I/O. 
  * The new `no5lvl` command-line parameter turns off five-level paging even if the kernel and the hardware support it. This is essentially a "chicken bit" that can turn off this new feature if it creates problems. 
  * The [power domain performance levels](/Articles/744047/) patch set has been merged. This code extends the power-management subsystem to be able to run the entire system (including peripheral devices) according to the needed power/performance balance. 
  * Trace markers (described briefly in [this article](/Articles/366796/)) can now be used to fire triggers for actions like histogram generation. See [this documentation patch](/Articles/756953/) for details. 
  * The control-group memory controller supports a new `memory.min` parameter. Like the existing `memory.low`, it is meant to ensure that the group has a minimum amount of RAM available to it, but it is meant to provide a stronger guarantee even when no reclaimable memory exists. [This commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/bf8d5d52ffe89aac5b46ddb39dd1a4351fae5df4) includes the documentation for this new parameter. 



> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

#### Filesystems

  * There have been a few Btrfs improvements this time around. An empty subvolume can now be deleted with `rmdir()`; no special capabilities are required. The new `FS_IOC_FSGETXATTR` and `FS_IOC_FSSETXATTR` `ioctl()` commands can be used to manipulate various file attributes (the append-only and immutable flags, for example). There is also a new set of `ioctl()` commands to allow unprivileged users to look up subvolume information. 
  * It is now possible for users running as root within a user namespace [to mount filesystems](/Articles/755593/), even if they lack privilege outside of the namespace. The filesystem type itself must be marked to allow this type of mount; the only filesystem so marked at this point is the filesystems in user space (FUSE) module, which has seen a number of changes to enable this functionality 
  * The fscrypt module, used for encryption of F2FS and ext4 filesystems, has gained support for the Speck128 and Speck256 ciphers. Speck is somewhat [controversial](/Articles/756964/) (the US NSA seems a little too enthusiastic about promoting it), but it does enable encryption on the lowest-end devices. Ted Ts'o [said](/Articles/756929/) that it's unlikely to be enabled on higher-end devices at all. ""This is really intended for 'The Next Billion Users'; phones like Android Go that was disclosed at the 2017 Google I/O conference, where the unsubsidized price is well under $100 USD"". 



#### Hardware support

  * **Audio** : Realtek RT1305/RT1306 amplifiers, Realtek RT5668B codecs, Mediatek MT6351 audio codecs, Analog Devices SSM2305 speaker amplifiers, Atmel I2S controllers, and Tempo Semiconductor TSCS454 codecs. 
  * **Graphics** : NVIDIA Volta GPUs, Xen paravirtualized front-end displays, Allwinner A31 MIPI-DSI controllers, Thine THC63LVD1024 LVDS decoder bridges, Cadence DPI/DSI bridges, Samsung Exynos image scalers, Broadcom V3D 3.x (and newer) GPUs, NXP TDA9950/TDA998X HDMI CEC engines, and AMD Vega 20 GPUs. 
  * **Media** : Video devices using I2C transports, Sharp QM1D1B0004 tuners, Cadence CSI-2 RX/TX controllers, OmniVision OV7251 sensors, Renesas R-Car MIPI CSI-2 receivers, and Sony IMX258 sensors. The (170 KLOC) atomisp driver has been removed from the staging tree due to a lack of progress. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : ChipOne icn8505 touchscreens, Crane CR0014114 LED boards, Spreadtrum Communications SC27xx LED controllers, TI LM3601x LED controllers, Lattice MachXO2 SPI FPGA controllers, Rave SP EEPROM controllers, IBM virtual management channel adapters, Rockchip PCIe endpoint controllers, and STMicroelectronics STM32 inter-processor communication controllers. 
  * **Networking** : Texas Instruments DP83TC822 PHYs and Microsemi Ocelot Ethernet switches. 
  * **Pin control** : Actions Semi S900 pin controllers, Renesas R8A77470 and R8A77990 pin controllers, and Allwinner H6 R_PIO pin controllers. 
  * **USB** : Richtek RT1711H Type-C USB controllers, Aspeed vHub virtual hubs, HiSilicon STB xHCI host controllers, Atheros AR71XX/9XXX USB PHYs, and MediaTek XS-PHY transceivers. 



#### Miscellaneous

  * The crypto subsystem now supports the [Zstandard](https://facebook.github.io/zstd/) compression algorithm and the [AEGIS](https://www.techrepublic.com/resource-library/whitepapers/aegis-a-fast-authenticated-encryption-algorithm/) and [MORUS [PDF]](https://competitions.cr.yp.to/round3/morusv2.pdf) encryption algorithms. 
  * The `/proc` interface for IPMI statistics has been removed; that information is still available in sysfs. 
  * The (scrupulously undocumented) BPF type format mechanism provides a metadata format for the description of the data types used by BPF programs. Its initial use is for the pretty-printing of values in BPF maps. 



#### Networking

  * The TCP protocol now supports [zero-copy receive operations](/Articles/754681/) under some conditions. 
  * The [`AF_XDP`](/Articles/750845/) subsystem has been merged; it allows zero-copy networking under the control of one or more BPF programs loaded from user space. [This commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/b4b8faa1ded7a3bb34db374c692a51cea29f9080) contains a sample `AF_XDP` application. 
  * The core [bpfilter](/Articles/747551/) mechanism has been merged. It is not truly functional for packet filtering at this point, but the infrastructure is now there to build on. That infrastructure includes a reworked [user-mode blob helper](/Articles/755919/) mechanism that is likely to see use well beyond bpfilter. 
  * The in-kernel TLS protocol implementation has gained support for offloading that protocol support into suitably capable hardware. The Mellanox mlx5 driver now supports TLS offloading. 
  * The TCP protocol supports selective acknowledgment (SACK) compression; its purpose is to limit the number of SACK packets sent when the network is already overloaded. 
  * It is now possible to attach a BPF program to a socket and have it run on `sendmsg()` calls; that program can do things like rewrite the IP addresses in the outgoing packet. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * As part of the new AIO polling mechanism, the interface to the `poll()` method has changed. The new function is: 
        
        __poll_t	(*poll_mask) (struct socket *sock, __poll_t events);
        

Many internal `poll()` implementations have been converted to this interface. To be able to support AIO polling, drivers should also implement the new `get_poll_head()` method, which returns the wait queue used for polling. 
  * The qspinlock implementation has been improved to eliminate potential starvation problems. 
  * There is a new `__kernel_timespec` structure: 
        
        struct __kernel_timespec {
        	__kernel_time64_t       tv_sec;                 /* seconds */
        	long long               tv_nsec;                /* nanoseconds */
            };
        

Its purpose is to facilitate the creation of year-2038-safe system calls on 32-bit systems by making the internal time representation be the same for both the 32-bit and 64-bit versions. Various implementations of system calls with year-2038 problems (`[nanosleep()](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/nanosleep.2.html)`, for example) have been updated to use this new type. 

  * The Sys V interprocess communication system calls have seen some work to make them year-2038 safe. 

  * The kernel configuration language has grown a new macro definition subsystem; it is intended to facilitate moving various build-time tests from the makefiles into the `Kconfig` files. See [Documentation.kbuild/kconfig-macro-language](/Articles/756963/) for details on how it works. 
  * A number of the [improvements to `struct page`](/Articles/753078/) discussed at [LSFMM 2018](/Articles/lsfmm2018/) have been merged. 




By the normal schedule, the 4.18 merge window should continue through June 17. The second half is likely to be somewhat slower than the first, though, since Linus Torvalds has indicated that he will be traveling during that time. If all goes to schedule, the final 4.18 release can be expected on August 5 or 12.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/4.18](/Kernel/Index#Releases-4.18)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
