# Year-2038 work in 4.18 [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 11, 2018 

We now have less than 20 years to wait until the `time_t` value used on 32-bit systems will overflow and create time-related mayhem across the planet. The [grand plan for solving this problem](/Articles/643234/) was posted over three years ago now; progress since then has seemed slow. But quite a bit of work has happened deep inside the kernel and, in 4.18, some of the first work that will be visible to user space has been merged. The year-2038 problem is not yet solved, but things are moving in that direction. 

If 32-bit systems are to be able to handle times after January 2038, they will need to switch to a 64-bit version of the `time_t` type; the kernel will obviously need to support applications using that new type. Doing so in a way that doesn't break existing applications is going to require some careful work, though. In particular, the kernel must be able to successfully run a system where applications have been rebuilt to use a 64-bit `time_t`, but ancient binaries stuck on 32-bit `time_t` still exist; both applications should continue to work (though the old code may fail to handle times correctly). 

The first step is to recognize that most architectures already have support for applications running in both 64-bit and 32-bit modes in the form of the compatibility code used to run 32-bit applications on 64-bit systems. At some point, all systems will be 64-bit systems when it comes to time handling, so it makes sense to use the compatibility calls for older applications even on 32-bit systems. To that end, with 4.18, work has been done to allow both 32-bit and 64-bit versions of the time-related system calls to be built on all architectures. The `CONFIG_64BIT_TIME` configuration symbol controls the building of the 64-bit versions on 32-bit systems, while `CONFIG_COMPAT_32BIT_TIME` controls the 32-bit versions. 

Internally, some work has been done to keep the handling of time formats as simple as possible. The new `__kernel_timespec` type describes how 64-bit `timespec` values will be passed between the kernel and user space; it is designed to be the same for both 64-bit applications and those running under 32-bit emulation. 

The long-term plan for many system calls with year-2038 issues is to create new versions, under new system-call numbers, that handle times in the `__kernel_timespec` format. The old versions, which will not handle 2038 correctly, will retain the old system-call numbers, so they will still be there for applications that expect them. Applications that are built for 64-bit time values will use the new versions and function correctly. For the most part, the patches for this phase of the work exist but have not yet found their way into the mainline. 

One set of system calls that _have_ changed are those managing System V interprocess communication. These system calls, providing access to semaphores, shared memory, and message queues, are not universally loved, but they do have users and need to continue to work. They also have interfaces using `time_t` values. For example, the [`semctl()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/semctl.2.html) system call uses the `semid_ds` structure, defined as: 
    
    
        struct semid_ds {
    	struct ipc_perm sem_perm;  /* Ownership and permissions */
    	time_t          sem_otime; /* Last semop time */
    	time_t          sem_ctime; /* Last change time */
    	unsigned long   sem_nsems; /* No. of semaphores in set */
        };
    

This structure looks like it would be difficult to extend to 64-bit time values without breaking compatibility, but the reality of the situation is a good illustration of how the view of system calls provided by the C library does not always match the actual interface provided by the kernel. The structure that is actually passed into and out of the kernel is rather different; the C library takes responsibility for converting between the two. The kernel's structure looks like this: 
    
    
        struct semid64_ds {
    	struct ipc64_perm sem_perm;	/* permissions .. see ipc.h */
    	__kernel_time_t	sem_otime;	/* last semop time */
    	unsigned long	__unused1;
    	__kernel_time_t	sem_ctime;	/* last change time */
    	unsigned long	__unused2;
    	unsigned long	sem_nsems;	/* no. of semaphores in array */
    	unsigned long	__unused3;
    	unsigned long	__unused4;
    };
    

This is the 32-bit version of the structure with some `#ifdef` lines taken out; the full definition can be found in [`include/uapi/asm-generic/sembuf.h`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/include/uapi/asm-generic/sembuf.h#L7). What jumps out here is the padding that exists between the time fields. Somebody, years ago (before the beginning of the Git era) decided that the kernel should use the `semid64_ds` structure on all systems, and to ensure that enough space existed to pass 64-bit time values at some time in the future. 

Many years later, that decision is paying off. In 4.18, the kernel will be able to unconditionally return 64-bit times for `sem_otime` and `sem_ctime`, with no compatibility issues to worry about. To that end, the structure (on 32-bit systems) now looks like: 
    
    
         struct semid64_ds {
    	struct ipc64_perm sem_perm;	/* permissions .. see ipc.h */
    	unsigned long	sem_otime;	/* last semop time */
    	unsigned long	sem_otime_high;
    	unsigned long	sem_ctime;	/* last change time */
    	unsigned long	sem_ctime_high;
    	unsigned long	sem_nsems;	/* no. of semaphores in array */
    	unsigned long	__unused3;
    	unsigned long	__unused4;
        };
    

The extra bits in the `_high` fields will be ignored until the C library is upgraded to use them, but that can happen independently. There are some minor issues to be dealt with (the padding values are in the wrong place on big-endian systems, necessitating a swap operation, for example), but the change is essentially painless. 

The one remaining piece, involving a bit more pain, is [`semtimedop()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/semop.2.html), which takes a `struct timespec` parameter. That call will have to be split into old and new versions, as described above — a change that has not found its way into 4.18. 

The merging of these changes for 4.18 shows that the work on the year-2038 problem is progressing. There is still quite a bit to do; beyond the new system calls, there are a bunch of `ioctl()` operations that will need to be found and fixed, for example. But, from the kernel point of view at least, perhaps there is some light visible at the end of the tunnel. A complete solution will also require a lot of work at the C-library, distribution, and application levels, though, so we are likely to be hearing about year-2038 work for a while yet.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Year 2038 problem](/Kernel/Index#Year_2038_problem)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
