# Revisiting the MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE hack [LWN.net]

> **Ready to give LWN a try?**
> 
> With a subscription to LWN, you can stay current with what is happening in the Linux and free-software community and take advantage of subscriber-only site features. We are pleased to offer you **[a free trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-trial/claim)** , no credit card required, so that you can see for yourself. Please, join us! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 29, 2018 

One of the the most commonly repeated mistakes in system-call design is [a failure to check for unknown flags](/Articles/588444/) wherever flags are accepted. If there is ever a point where callers can get away with setting unknown flags, then adding new flags becomes a hazardous act. In the case of [`mmap()`](http://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mmap.2.html), though, developers found a clever way around this problem. A recent discussion has briefly called that approach into question, though, and raised the issue of what constitutes a kernel regression. No changes are forthcoming as a result, but the discussion does provide an opportunity to look at both the specific hack and how the kernel community decides whether a change is a regression or not. 

Back in 2017, several developers were trying to figure out a way to safely allow direct user-space access to files stored on nonvolatile memory devices. The hardware allows this memory to be addressed directly by the processor, but any changes could go astray if the filesystem were to move blocks around at the same time. The solution that arose was a new `mmap()` flag called [`MAP_SYNC`](/Articles/731706/). When a file is mapped with this flag set (and the file is stored on a nonvolatile memory device), the kernel will take extra care to ensure that access to the mapping and filesystem-level changes will not conflict with each other. As far as applications are concerned, using this flag solves the problem. 

Or, at least, it would solve the problem if it weren't for the unknown-flags problem, which has afflicted `mmap()` since the beginning. `mmap()` is not allowed (~~by standards like POSIX~~ by many years of history) to return an error when given unknown flags. One possible problem that can result from adding a new flag to such a system call is that some program that was, for whatever reason, setting the `MAP_SYNC` flag already could see a change of behavior; that should not be a huge issue with this particular flag. More serious is that there is no way for an application to know that the kernel it's running on at the moment supports `MAP_SYNC` at all, since all kernels will return success with that flag set. Any application that is depending on `MAP_SYNC` to ensure the integrity of its data needs to know for sure that the feature is supported, but `mmap()` provides no way to obtain that knowledge. 

The solution to this problem came out of the realization that `mmap()` supports two flags — `MAP_SHARED` and `MAP_PRIVATE` — that are mutually contradictory. Any `mmap()` call with both flags set will fail, so it is a certainty that no working programs are making such calls. This combination is thus potentially available for other uses. [This commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/1c9725974074a047f6080eecc62c50a8e840d050) added a new "flag" called `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` that was defined as the combination of `MAP_SHARED` and `MAP_PRIVATE`; it requests the creation of a shared mapping, but also requests the explicit validation of any other flags provided in that call. Filesystems and device drivers that support flags beyond the "legacy set" can tell the kernel (via the `mmap_supported_flags` field in [`struct file_operations`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v4.17.3/source/include/linux/fs.h#L1703)) about that fact. In the absence of this information, the kernel will conclude that those flags are unsupported and (in the presence of `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE`) fail any call that tries to use them. 

Both `MAP_SYNC` and `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` were merged for the 4.15 release. An application that uses both flags in its `mmap()` call can be sure that `MAP_SYNC` is actually supported by both the kernel and the filesystem that the mapped file is stored in. The kernel community has, in other words, found a way to add (optional) flag validation to a system call that is defined by the standards to not perform that validation. 

Recently, though, Eric Sandeen [stumbled across](/Articles/758597/) `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` and realized that its addition changed the behavior of the `mmap()` system call in a possibly surprising way. Before, passing both `MAP_SHARED` and `MAP_PRIVATE` would cause `mmap()` to fail; now the call may succeed. Some application could perhaps pass those two flags (with no knowledge of `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE`) and see a different result than before. Calling this change a "regression", Sandeen wrote a patch that restored the previous behavior in the absence of flags outside of the legacy set; in other words, `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` would fail if there were no special flags to validate. 

That patch will not be merged, though. Linus Torvalds [stressed](/Articles/758598/) that a change in behavior is not, in itself, a regression. To be a regression, the change must break programs that were working before. The bits that make up `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` were explicitly chosen because no program using that combination could possibly have been working, so none could be broken. Torvalds described it as the logical equivalent of adding a new system call; programs that tried to invoke that call before it was added will certainly see a change in behavior, but it's hard to describe that as a regression. 

Instead, Sandeen's patch might cause currently working `mmap()` calls to start failing; perhaps some application is using `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` even though it uses no other flags that require validation. That _would_ be a regression. So the behavior of `MAP_SHARED_VALIDATE` will remain unchanged in the (likely) continued absence of reports of broken applications. 

Experience shows that programs can depend on just about any subtle aspect of a system's behavior; [Hyrum's law](http://www.hyrumslaw.com/) has been borne out many times. No problems have been reported in the six months since 4.15 was released, though, so the chances are that this particular change is regression-free. There _is_ one fix to be made, though: the `mmap()` man page still says that passing both `MAP_SHARED` and `MAP_PRIVATE` will result in an error, which is no longer true. That, fortunately, is an easy problem to fix.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [System calls](/Kernel/Index#System_calls)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
