# Time namespaces [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
September 21, 2018
The kernel's
namespace
abstraction allows
different groups of processes to have different views of the system.  This
feature is most often used with containers; it allows each container to
have its own view of the set of running processes, the network environment,
the filesystem hierarchy, and more.  One aspect of the system that remains
universal, though, is the concept of the system time.  The recently posted
time
namespace patch set
(from Dmitry Safonov with a lot of work by Andrei
Vagin) seeks to change that.
Creating a virtualized view of the system time is not a new concept; Jeff
Dike
posted an implementation
back in 2006
to support his user-mode Linux project.  Those patches were not merged at
the time but, since then, the use of containers has taken off and the
interest has increased.  One might view time as a universal concept, but
there are use cases for a per-container notion of time; they can be as
simple as testing software at different points in time.  The driving force
behind this patch set, though, is likely to be problems associated with
the checkpointing of processes and migrating them between physical hosts.  When
a process is restarted, it should have a consistent view of time, and that
may require applying some adjustments at restart time.
The implementation is straightforward enough.  Each time namespace contains
a set of offsets to be added to the system's notion of the current time.
The kernel maintains a number of clocks with different characteristics
(documented
here
),
each of which can have a different offset.  Some of these clocks, such as
CLOCK_MONOTONIC
, have an undefined start point that will vary from
one running system to the next, so they will need their own offsets to
maintain consistent behavior for a container that has been migrated.
System calls that adjust the system time will, when called outside of the
root time namespace, adjust the namespace-specific offsets instead.
There is one small complication, in that some of the time-related system calls
are implemented as
virtual system calls
on
some architectures for performance reasons.  Querying the current time can be a
frequent operation, so it can be worth the trouble to answer such queries
without actually entering the kernel.  Making the virtual system calls
aware of time namespaces requires making the clock offsets available to
user space; the good news is that there is a small piece of the address
space called the "VVAR 
page" (even though it is larger than one page) meant to hold just this kind of
data.  The time namespace work adds another page to this VVAR region to
hold the time offsets, allowing calls like
gettimeofday()
to
continue to work without entering the kernel.
Namespace maintainer Eric Biederman has
expressed support
for time namespaces, but he has also suggested some changes.  His
observation is that the
timekeeper
structure
used within the kernel to implement the various clocks
already contains a set of offsets relating those clocks to the hardware's
idea of the current time.  Rather than adding a second layer of offsets, he
suggested, each namespace could be given its own
timekeeper
structure and the offsets found there could be tweaked instead.  That might
add to the complexity of the implementation, but 
this approach would have some advantages.  Most of the kernel's current
timekeeping code would just work with namespaces, allowing better testing
overall with fewer special cases.  Integrating namespaces at this level
would also allow each container to run its own NTP process, and different
containers could, for example, use different leap-second policies.
Biederman raised the possibility of security issues if time namespaces
can be used to manipulate dates on files in filesystems, though he was not
sure if that actually mattered.  He also suggested that access to the
realtime clock (the hardware clock that, in the end, drives the system's
timekeeping) 
should perhaps be left out of the time namespace until it is clear that
there are actual use cases for it.  If that use case does arise, he said,
some thought will have to be given to how the realtime clock, which is a
global resource, should be presented to non-root namespaces.
There are, in other words, a few details remaining to be worked out
regarding how time namespaces will work.  There do not, however, appear to
be any real obstacles to a solution, so chances are good that the kernel's
collection of namespaces will be enhanced by time namespaces sometime in
the not-too-distant future.  Given how long the idea has been around, one
might say it's about time.
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Namespaces
to post comments