# Bringing the Android kernel back to the mainline [LWN.net]

By
Jonathan Corbet
November 15, 2018
Linux Plumbers Conference
Android devices are based on the Linux kernel but, since the beginning,
those devices have not run
mainline
kernels.  The amount of out-of-tree
code shipped on those devices has been seen as a  problem for 
most of this time, and significant resources have been dedicated to reducing it.
At the 2018
Linux Plumbers
Conference
, Sandeep Patil talked about this problem and what is being
done to address it.  The dream of running mainline kernels on Android
devices has not yet been achieved, but it may be closer than many people think.
Android kernels, he said, start their life as a long-term stable (LTS)
release from the mainline; those releases are combined with core
Android-specific code to make the
Android
Common Kernel
releases.  Vendors
will pick a common kernel and add a bunch more out-of-tree code to create a
kernel specific to a system-on-chip 
(SoC) and ship that to device manufacturers.  Eventually one of those SoC
kernels 
is frozen, perhaps with yet another pile of out-of-tree code tossed in, and
used as the kernel for a specific device model.  It now only 
takes a few weeks to merge an LTS release into the Android Common Kernel, but
it's still a couple of years before that kernel shows up as a device
kernel.  That is why Android devices are always running ancient kernels.
There are a lot of problems associated with this process.  The Android core
has to be prepared to run on a range of older kernels, a constraint that
makes it hard to use newer kernel features.  Kernel updates are slow or,
more often, nonexistent.  The use of large amounts of out-of-tree code (as
in millions of lines of it) makes it hard to merge in new stable updates,
and even when that's possible, shipping the result to users is frightening
to vendors
and not often done.  There is no continuous-integration process for Android
kernels, and it's not possible to run Android systems on mainline kernels.
All told, the way Android kernels are developed and managed takes away a
lot of the advantages of using Linux in the first place, but work is being
done to address many of these issues.
With regard to older kernels: the Oreo release required the use of one of
the 3.18, 4.4, or 4.9 kernels — an improvement over previous
releases, which had no kernel-version requirements at all.  The Pie release
narrowed the requirements 
further, saying that devices must ship with 4.4.107, 4.9.84, or 4.14.42 (or
a later stable release, in each case).  The Android developers are trying
to "push things up 
a notch" by mandating the incorporation of stable updates.  This has
improved the situation, but the base kernel remains two years old (or
more), and the Android core still has to work on kernels back to
3.18.
Patil noted that some people worry about regressions from the stable
updates, but in two years of incorporating those stable updates, the
Android project has
only encountered one regression.  In particular, 4.4.108 broke things, which is
why nothing later than 4.4.107 is required at the moment.  Otherwise, he
said, the stable updates have proved to be highly reliable for Android
systems.
One reason for that may be that the situation with continuous-integration
testing is improving; the
LKFT effort
is now running
functional testing on the LTS, ‑rc, and Android Common kernels, for
example.  More testing is happening through
KernelCI
, and  Android developers are
contributing to the
Linux Test Project
as
well. 
Kernel patches go through pre-submission testing on an emulated device
called
Cuttlefish
, which
can run both Android and mainline kernels.  More testing is being done by
SoC vendors, none of whom have reported problems from LTS kernel updates so
far.  They do see merge conflicts with their out-of-tree code, but that is
unsurprising.
Even so, kernel upgrades remain a huge issue for Android vendors, who worry
about shipping large numbers of changes to deployed devices.  So devices
generally don't get upgraded kernels after they ship — a bad situation, but
it's better than the recent past, when kernels could not be upgraded for a
given SoC after its launch, he said.  Google plans to continue to push
vendors to ship updates, though, eventually mandating updates to newer LTS
releases even after a device is launched.  At some point, LTS releases will
be included in Android security bulletins, because there really is value in
getting all of the bug fixes.  Patil echoed Greg Kroah-Hartman's statement
that there are no "security bugs" as such; "there are just bugs" and they
should all be fixed.
The problem of devices being unable to run mainline kernels remains; the
problem, of course, is all of that out-of-tree code.  The amount of that
code in the Android Common Kernel has been reduced considerably, though,
with a focused effort at getting the changes upstream.  There are now only
about 30 patches in the Android Common Kernel, adding about 6,500 lines of
code, that are needed to boot Android.  The eventual plan is to push that
to zero, 
but there are a number of issues to deal with still, including solving
problems with priority inheritance in binder, getting energy-aware
scheduling into the mainline, and upstreaming the SDCardFS filesystem
bridge.
Project Treble
, he said, introduced a new
"vendor interface" API that
implements a sort of hardware abstraction layer.  Along with this interface
came the concept of a
generic system image
(GSI), being a build of the Android
Open Source Project that can be booted on any Android device.  If the GSI
can be booted on a specific device, then the manufacturer has implemented
the vendor interface correctly.
For now, the kernel is considered to be
part of the vendor interface — the vendor must provide it as part of the
low-level implementation.  The plan, though, is for Android to provide a
generic kernel image based on the mainline.  Devices will be expected to
run this kernel; to make that happen, vendors will provide a set of kernel
modules to add the necessary hardware support.  Getting there will require
the upstreaming of
kernel symbol namespaces
among other things.
This design will clearly not eliminate the out-of-tree code problem, since
those modules will, in many or most cases, not come from the mainline.  But
there is still a significant change here: vendor-specific code will be
relegated to loadable modules and, thus, be unable to change the core
kernel.  The days of vendors shipping their own CPU schedulers should come
to an end, for example; all out-of-tree code will have to work with the
generic kernel image using the normal module interface.  That will force
that code into a more upstream-ready state, which is a step in the right
direction.
In conclusion, Patil said, the Android kernel team is now aggressively
trying to upstream code before shipping it.  There is a renewed effort to
proactively report vulnerabilities and other problems and to work with
upstream to resolve them.  Beyond the above, the project has a number of
goals, including getting the ashmem and ion modules out of the staging
tree, improving Android's use of device trees, and more.  But things are
progressing; someday, the "Android problem" may be far behind us.
[Thanks to the Linux Foundation, LWN's travel sponsor, for supporting my
travel to LPC.]
Index entries for this article
Kernel
Android/Generic kernel image
Conference
Linux Plumbers Conference/2018
to post comments