# Bcachefs gets closer [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 11, 2019 

When it comes to new filesystems for Linux, patience is certainly a virtue. Btrfs took years to mature and, according to some, still isn't ready yet. [Tux3](/Articles/309094/) has kept users waiting since at least 2008; as of 2018 its developer still [said](https://phunq.net/pipermail/tux3/2018-April/002357.html) that it was progressing. By these measures, [bcachefs](https://bcachefs.org/) is a relative youngster, having been first [announced](/Articles/655183/) a mere four years ago. Development of this next-generation filesystem continues, and bcachefs developer Kent Overstreet recently [proclaimed](/ml/linux-kernel/20190610191420.27007-1-kent.overstreet@gmail.com/) his desire to ""get this sucker merged"", but there are some obstacles to overcome still. 

Bcachefs has its origins in the [bcache](/Articles/497024/) caching layer, though it is a separate project at this point. Like most of the newer filesystems out there, it uses a copy-on-write approach — data is copied to a new location when changed rather than overwritten. That enables the implementation of a number of interesting features; those intended for bcachefs include data checksumming, compression, multiple-device and RAID support, hierarchical storage management, snapshots, and, naturally, good performance. Work on bcachefs has apparently been slowed by the fact that there is relatively little interest in supporting this work; Overstreet has been [soliciting donations on Patreon](https://www.patreon.com/bcachefs) to be able to push the project forward. He has seemingly had some success in this area, and feels that the filesystem is now getting close to ready: 

This has been a monumental effort over a lot of years, and I'm _really_ happy with how it's turned out. I'm excited to finally unleash this upon the world. 

Those who wish to play with this new filesystem will quickly discover that one of the places where development has lagged is documentation. For the most part, users have to pull down the code and stumble through the process of setting up a filesystem. There is, at least, [a man page](/Articles/793287/) for the `bcachefs` command that makes a good starting point. 

Overstreet said that the bcachefs code is in a state where it is ready for merging into the mainline. Users will have to be patient for a little while longer, though, as it seems that there are still a few obstacles in the way, starting with [a number of complaints from Linus Torvalds](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wi0iMHcO5nsYug06fV3-8s8fz7GDQWCuanefEGq6mHH1Q@mail.gmail.com/) on how the repository itself is managed. Simply cleaning things up at that level is likely to require a fair amount of work. 

#### Core-kernel changes

But, beyond that, there are a number of core-kernel changes that will have to go in to support bcachefs. Overstreet surely knew that this is where any initial resistance might come from; code that is buried within a filesystem implementation is unlikely to hurt people who do not actually use it, but core-kernel changes can have wider repercussions. So, while the bcachefs code itself has not been seen on the kernel mailing lists in recent times, the core changes were all posted for review. 

One of those changes is the addition of a new locking primitive called a [SIX lock](/ml/linux-kernel/20190610191420.27007-3-kent.overstreet@gmail.com/). These locks are reader/writer locks, but with a twist. Normal reader/writer locks allow any number of readers to access the protected data concurrently, but a writer has exclusive access. SIX locks tweak the model by turning the writer side into a two-step process. Any code that wishes to have write access to a protected data structure must first obtain an "intent" lock. Only one holder of an intent lock may exist, so the second thread that tries to obtain one will block until the first releases its lock. But holding the intent lock does not block readers, who can continue to access the data structure. 

Before actually making any changes, though, the holder of the intent lock must upgrade it to a write lock, which will ensure that everybody else, including readers, is excluded. The intent lock, thus, gives a writer access to a data structure that will not change while allowing that writer to minimize the amount of time that it holds exclusive access to the data structure. 

Overstreet said that SIX locks ""seem to be pretty uncontroversial"" and, for the most part, the (lack of) complaints would seem to bear that out. That said, Torvalds did suggest that it might be better to add the "intent" level to the kernel's rwsem locks rather than introducing an entirely new locking primitive. Dave Chinner [objected](/ml/linux-kernel/20190611041045.GA14363@dread.disaster.area/) to this idea, though, saying that rwsems are already too fragile and should not be complicated further. A definitive resolution has not been reached here, but it seems likely that SIX locks will be merged with the rest when the time comes. 

Then, there is another locking primitive called [`pagecache_lock`](/ml/linux-kernel/20190610191420.27007-4-kent.overstreet@gmail.com/). There is one of these locks for each address space; its job is to regulate the addition of pages to the page cache. This lock can be acquired in two modes, called "add" and "block"; the former is for adding pages, while the latter is for preventing others from adding pages. Any number of threads can hold the lock simultaneously as long as they all use the same mode, so many threads can be adding pages concurrently, for example. Changing the mode of the lock may require a wait, though. Torvalds didn't like this lock, saying ""we don't do those hacky recursive things"". 

Overstreet agreed that this lock is not ideal; in the patch-set cover letter he said it was ""intentionally ugly in the hopes that someone else will come up with a magical elegant solution"" — an approach that is often surprisingly effective. He defended the need for the lock, though. In current kernels, a number of operations, such as direct I/O, will remove pages from the page cache to prevent data corruption resulting from an operation that bypasses the cache. But there is nothing that prevents the system from faulting those pages back into the cache; that can happen as a result of user-space code, automatic readahead in the kernel, or any of a number of other things. If pages re-enter the cache at the wrong time, data corruption could result. 

The existence of the problem is not in doubt, but opinions differ on how it might be solved. Torvalds [suggested](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wizTF+NbMrSRG-bc-LyuT7PUJ1QRAR8q_anOd6mY+9Z4A@mail.gmail.com/) that some sort of page-level locking mechanism would be better. Chinner is [working on range locks](/ml/linux-kernel/20190613235524.GK14363@dread.disaster.area/) as a possible solution; he also said that more and more I/O is likely to bypass the page cache altogether. Matthew Wilcox [suggested](/ml/linux-kernel/20190611142644.GC32656@bombadil.infradead.org/) another approach where buffered I/O operations would not be able to add pages to the cache while direct I/O is underway, but where direct I/O would also just act like buffered I/O when the relevant pages already exist in the cache. 

Unsurprisingly, this problem was not solved in the mailing-list discussion. A number of ideas were raised, though, and Overstreet is left with the task of showing that his solution remains the best — a tall order. 

Finally, there is the ["closure" mechanism](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/drivers/md/bcache/closure.h) that is currently used inside the bcache code. A closure is essentially a reference count with some supporting code to make it easy to wait for specific things to happen. Overstreet wants to move the closure code into the `lib` directory to make it more widely available. Most people seem not to care, but Christoph Hellwig [seems strongly opposed](/ml/linux-kernel/20190613072841.GA7996@infradead.org/) to the idea. He has not yet responded to a request for more information on why he dislikes it, though. 

Thus, as can be seen, there are a few problems that need to be solved yet — and that is before anybody has looked at the bcachefs code itself. That is likely to get close scrutiny as well when the time comes; some filesystem developers have been clear in their belief that merging filesystem code before it is ready has led to long-term problems in the past. So, while bcachefs looks like an interesting feature that is actively progressing, the smart money would still not be on it landing in the mainline kernel in the near future.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems/bcachefs](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems-bcachefs)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
