# 5.3 Merge window, part 1 [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 12, 2019 

As of this writing, exactly 6,666 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 5.3 development cycle. The merge window has thus just begun, there is still quite a bit in the way of interesting changes to look at. Read on for a list of what has been merged so far.   


#### Architecture-specific

  * The x86 [`umonitor`, `umwait`, and `tpause` instructions](/Articles/790920/) are now supported for use by user-space code; they make it possible to efficiently execute small delays without the need for busy loops. A knob has been provided to allow system administrators to control the maximum period for which the CPU can be paused. 
  * The pa-risc architecture now supports dynamic ftrace. 



#### Core kernel

  * The [scheduler utilization clamping](/Articles/762043/) patch set has been merged. This feature allows an administrator to cause specific processes to appear to create more or less load than they actually do; that, in turn, will affect how the CPU frequency governor responds when those processes become runnable. So, for example, an interactive process could be made to appear to have heavy CPU requirements, causing an immediate increase in CPU frequency when that process wakes up. 
  * The [`pidfd_open()`](/Articles/789023/) system call has been added; it allows a process to obtain a pidfd for another, existing process. It is also now possible to use `poll()` on a pidfd to get notification when the associated process dies. 
  * Also added is the [`clone3()`](/Articles/792628/) system call, which reorganizes the `clone()` interface, makes it more extensible, and adds space for more flags. 
  * The new `bpf_send_signal()` helper allows a BPF program to send a signal to an arbitrary process. 
  * The BPF verifier is now able to handle programs with loops, as long as the execution of the loop is bounded and cannot cause the program to exceed the maximum instruction count; that removes a major limitation that has irritated BPF developers for some time. Note that this is _not_ the [bounded-loop work](/Articles/773605/) that was under discussion late last year; it is a new implementation. It seems that the verifier efficiency improvements merged for 5.2 made this task rather simpler. 



#### Filesystems and block layer

  * The NFSv4 server now creates a directory under `/proc/fs/nfsd/clients` with information about current NFS clients, including which files they have open. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Audio** : Conexant CX2072X codecs, Rhythm Tech rt1011 and rt1308 amplifiers, and Cirrus Logic CS47L35, CS47L85, and CS47L90 codecs. 
  * **Industrial I/O** : Infineon DPS310 pressure and temperature sensors, Analog Devices ADF4371 and ADF4372 wideband synthesizers, Analog Devices AD8366 gain amplifiers, and ChromeOS EC lid-angle sensors. 
  * **Media** : Allegro DVT video control units and Amlogic video decoders. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Freescale i.MX8 DDR performance monitors, Renesas RZ/A1 interrupt controllers, Annapurna Labs fabric interrupt controllers, Atmel SHA204A random-number generators, TI LM3697, LM36274, and LM36274 LED controllers, Dialog Semiconductor SLG51000 regulators, Socionext SynQuacer SPI controllers, Freescale i.MX8M CPU-frequency controllers, Infineon PXE1610 voltage regulators, Infineon IRPS5401 power-management ICs, NXP i.MX8 SCU on-chip OTP controllers, Mixel MIPI DSI PHYs, Fairchild Semiconductor FSA9480 microUSB switches, and ChromeOS embedded controllers. 
  * **Networking** : NXP TJA11xx PHYs, Google Virtual NICs, and Hisilicon HI13X1 network interfaces. 
  * **USB** : Qualcomm PCIe Gen2 PHYs. 
  * **Removals** : the isdn4linux ISDN driver subsystem has been removed entirely; it doesn't appear to have been used for some time. The separate CAPI subsystem is also on its way out, but it has only been moved to the staging directory for now. The mISDN subsystem will remain for now. See [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/8a7e8ff8ce8a) for details. 



#### Networking

  * The kernel will now accept IPv4 addresses in the 0.0.0.0/8 range as valid. Getting the Internet as a whole to allow that is a work in progress but, once it happens, it will make 16 million more IPv4 addresses available for use. 
  * It is now possible to attach BPF programs (at the control-group level) to the `setsockopt()` and `getsockopt()` system calls. That allows the imposition of administrator policy on those calls; see [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/0c51b3697a44) for some documentation. 
  * There is also a new socket-level hook to call a BPF program once every round-trip-time interval. 



#### Security-related

  * Cryptographic keys can now be tied to a specific user or network namespace, making them unavailable outside of that namespace. Keys are also now protected by access control lists; see [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/2e12256b9a76) for details. (Note that the ACL patch was [subsequently reverted](https://git.kernel.org/linus/028db3e290f1) though it may be back before the end of the merge window). 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * [`force_sig()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/kernel/signal.c#L1555) has always taken the target task as a parameter, but it has never actually been safe to use for anything other than the current task. That parameter has been removed and a large number of callers have been updated. 



Linus Torvalds has been a little grumpy during this merge window, having encountered multiple regressions that affected his machine. Most of those have been worked out for now; with luck things will go more smoothly from here on out. If the usual schedule holds, the 5.3 merge window will close on July 21, with the final 5.3 release expected in early-to-mid September.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.3](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.3)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
