# Maintainers Summit topics: pull depth, hardware vulnerabilities, etc. [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 17, 2019 

* * *

[Maintainers Summit](/Articles/799060)

The final sessions at the 2019 Linux Kernel Maintainers Summit covered a number of relatively quick topics, including the "pull depth" for code going into the mainline, the handling of hardware vulnerabilities, the ABI status of tracepoints, and more.   


#### Pull depth

In the discussion prior to the summit, James Bottomley [noted](/ml/ksummit-discuss/1559836116.15946.27.camel@HansenPartnership.com/) that a lot of subsystem trees are pulled directly into the mainline by Linus Torvalds. He wondered whether that is a good thing, or whether it might be better to have mid-level maintainers aggregating more pull requests to increase the "pull depth" of lower-level trees and decrease the load at the top. Bottomley was not at the summit itself, but his topic was discussed there; the answer was that things are mostly OK as they are. (For the curious, a graphic showing the pull paths for the 5.1 kernel can be found on [this page](/Articles/786656/).) 

Torvalds responded to the question by saying that he loves to get large pull requests from maintainers he trusts implicitly; that way, he can get a lot of work into the mainline with little effort. There is just one little problem: there are few maintainers that he trusts to that degree. In the absence of that trust, he would prefer to get more, smaller requests that are easier to review and easier to refuse if there is something wrong. He mentioned some subsystems in particular that have been problematic in the past; bypassing the maintainer and getting more focused pull requests from lower-level maintainers has improved the situation. He is not happy about having to do that, but it is better than the alternative, he said. 

He does not, however, feel overworked by the number of trees he is pulling now. He aims to act on about 25 pull requests per day during the merge window, normally spending about ten minutes on each of those. 

There are advantages to having a maintainer hierarchy, though, that go beyond reducing the number of pull requests at the top. Dave Airlie pointed out that it is a good way to train others to manage the subsystem and know that others would be able to handle it. Torvalds said that, with many subsystems, he is not competent to review the patches himself; it is good to have a mid-level maintainer who understands the area looking at things. 

One thing that can reduce his workload, Torvalds said, is getting conflict-resolution trees from maintainers with their pull requests. He still generally wants to resolve merge conflicts himself, but it can be helpful to see how the maintainer would do it. He also gave some advice for anybody wanting to sneak a feature in via a pull request: just delete a lot of lines of code. That makes Torvalds happy enough that he doesn't look closely at the rest. 

Olof Johansson said that the [problems with the Arm architecture subsystem](/Articles/437162/) back in 2011 would not have been solved without Torvalds "roaring" about them. Perhaps something similar is needed to address other problematic subsystems, he said. 

The session closed with linux-next maintainer Stephen Rothwell letting it be known that he has been having a harder time than usual, with sixteen-hour days being required to put linux-next together. Why it is taking so long is not entirely clear, though; he was not able to put his finger on a specific cause. He also advised the group that he would be out and unable to work on linux-next during the 5.4 merge window. 

#### Hardware vulnerabilities

The handling of hardware vulnerabilities like Meltdown and Spectre was a big topic at the [2018 Maintainers Summit](/Articles/769417/). One year later, Thomas Gleixner gave a quick update on how the situation has changed. 

In the past year, he said, the community has, with luck, put together a working set of processes for dealing with hardware-related problems. He said that "Intel is still trying to control things" in a number of ways, but that the community has been pushing back. There is [a new document](https://git.kernel.org/linus/ddaedbbece90add970faeac87f7d7d40341936ce) in the kernel describing how the process should work; some vendors are still quibbling about the details but, for the most part, this process has been accepted by the industry. 

The document includes a list of "ambassadors" who serve as a liaison between specific companies and the community for dealing with hardware bugs. That list is slowly filling up. Many company lawyers evidently see the document as being a good thing; having the ground rules set down lets everybody know how the whole process is expected to work. 

So overall it seems that the community's processes for dealing with these problems are in relatively good shape. That said, Gleixner hopes that we will never have to use those processes again — at least not until after he retires. There is "not much in the pipeline", which is a welcome bit of news. 

#### Tracepoints as ABI

There are some topics that the attendees of the Maintainers Summit are happy to discuss; others provoke groans as soon as they are proposed. For an example of the latter variety, consider the question of whether kernel tracepoints can be seen as part of the user-space ABI, as raised by Steve Rostedt. This is a topic that has come around many times at these events, but which has never seemingly been fully resolved to everybody's satisfaction. 

Torvalds repeated his viewpoint, which seems clear enough: if changing an aspect of kernel behavior will cause user space to break, then that behavior should be seen as part of the ABI. Alexei Starovoitov pointed out that tracepoints have changed in the past and the users of those tracepoints have simply adapted to the change. Torvalds answered that, if somebody complains to him about a change like that, the change will be reverted. 

As a (post-summit) example of how seriously he takes this policy, consider the [final commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/72dbcf72156641fde4d8ea401e977341bfd35a05) before the release of the 5.3 kernel. An ext4 change made its I/O rather more efficient; that meant fewer I/O interrupts during the early boot process, generating less entropy for the random-number generator. A certain user-space setup then failed to boot properly because it blocked waiting for entropy. The ext4 change was reverted to avoid this problem while a real solution is worked out. 

Dave Miller pointed out that it is now easy to build BPF-based tools that make use of kprobes — probes attached at run time to arbitrary points in the kernel. Some of these tools are widely used. Torvalds responded that, in that case, an ABI exists. That led to a fair amount of concern, since kprobes are entirely outside the control of the kernel community and could end up freezing almost any part of the kernel's behavior. 

Ted Ts'o pointed out that many subsystems have avoided adding tracepoints out of the fear of creating ABI issues. That drives tool developers to resort to kprobes instead, perhaps making the problem even worse. It might, he suggested, be better to just add a few carefully thought-out tracepoints where they are really needed. Miller called the situation ironic: the community is afraid that it has created software so useful that people are actually using it. 

Torvalds closed down the topic by reiterating that these discussions have come around for years without any real change. Over those years, there have been almost no real problems resulting from tracepoints. Why, he asked, are we still discussing this issue? He suggested that it should be blacklisted as a topic at future summits. 

#### Subsystem profiles

As the 2019 Maintainers Summit approached its end, Dan Williams briefly raised the topic of the [subsystem maintainer profile patches](/ml/linux-kernel/156821692280.2951081.18036584954940423225.stgit@dwillia2-desk3.amr.corp.intel.com/) he posted recently. The purpose of these patches is to document how specific subsystems work, making it easier for developers to submit patches that follow the local rules. Torvalds said that the patches seem OK, but he would like to see some real users — subsystems that actually document their workings using the proposed mechanism. 

I felt the need to point out that some developers oppose these patches, claiming that they provide justification for subsystem maintainers who want to create their own special rules. That could take the kernel further away from having more uniform processes, which most people think would be a good thing. Torvalds replied that these patches aren't creating that kind of diversity; instead, they are simply "documenting reality". Kees Cook, who has done a lot of cross-tree work and has run into various local customs, said that having this documentation in place would make his job easier. 

And with that note, the summit adjourned for another year. 

[Your editor thanks the Linux Foundation, LWN's travel sponsor, for supporting travel to this event.]  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/User-space ABI](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-User-space_ABI)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Kernel Maintainers Summit/2019](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Kernel_Maintainers_Summit-2019)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
