# 5.8 Merge window, part 2 [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 14, 2020 

By the time Linus Torvalds [released 5.8-rc1](/Articles/823019/) and closed the merge window for this development cycle, 14,206 non-merge changesets had been pulled into the repository for 5.8. That is more work than was pulled for the entire 5.7 cycle; clearly development work on the kernel has not (yet) slowed down in response to events in the wider world. The nearly 6,700 changes pulled since [the previous summary](/Articles/822077/) include huge numbers of fixes and internal cleanups, but there were a number of significant features added as well. 

#### Architecture-specific

  * The RISC-V architecture has gained support for the KGDB kernel debugger. 



#### Core kernel

  * The `/proc` filesystem now properly supports multiple private instances, each with independent mount options. 
  * The kernel will now refuse loadable modules if any sections in the module executable have both the write and execution bits set. This is part of a larger effort to ensure that no kernel memory is both writable and executable. 
  * After a couple of years of work, the [generalized kernel event-notification mechanism](/Articles/760714/) has been merged. See [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/6c3297841472) for an overview and [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/c73be61cede5) for documentation on the new subsystem. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * The device mapper has a new "emulate block size" target that can be used to cause a block device to appear to have a block size smaller than what the hardware supports. [This commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/d3c7b35c20d6) has documentation. 
  * The "zoned" target for the device mapper has gained the ability to pair regular block devices with the zoned variety; the result should be an aggregate with higher performance than the zoned device alone. 
  * The F2FS filesystem has added support for LZO-RLE compression. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Clock** : Renesas r8a7742 clock pulse generators, Qualcomm MSM8939 global clock controllers, Intel Lightning Mountain clock controllers, Ingenic X1830 clock generators, MediaTek MT6765 clocks, and Baikal-T1 clock control units. 
  * **GPIO and pin control** : The "GPIO aggregator" driver can collect a set of unrelated GPIO lines into a virtual GPIO chip, allowing them to be exposed to user space as a unit (and, in particular, allowing permissions in `/dev` to be used to control access to those lines). See [this documentation commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/ce7a2f77f976) for details. Also: NXP i.MX8DXL pin controllers, Qualcomm SM8250 pin controllers, and Intel Jasper Lake pin controllers. 
  * **Industrial I/O** : Semtech SX9310/SX9311 proximity sensors, Analog Devices Generic AXI ADC IP cores, Analog Devices AD9467 High Speed analog-to-digital converters, Maxim max1241 analog-to-digital converters, Analog Devices ADIS16475 inertial measurement units, Atlas Scientific EZO sensors, and Vishay VCNL3020 proximity sensors. 
  * **I2C** : Qualcomm camera control interfaces, Baikal-T1 system controllers, and Nuvoton I2C controllers. 
  * **LED** : Dell Wyse 3020 status LED controllers, SGMICRO SGM3140 LED controllers, and Awinic AW2013 LED controllers. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Monolithic Power Systems MP2629 battery managers, Mediatek MT6360 power-management ICs, ARM Secure Monitor watchdog timers, ARM Integrator Logic Module buses, NVIDIA Tegra video input controllers, Baikal-T1 AXI and ABP buses, Socionext UniPhier PCIe endpoint controllers, Allwinner H6 I/O memory-management units, Ingenic JZ47xx coprocessors, CellWise CW2015 batteries, ROHM bd99954 chargers, Arasan NAND flash controllers, Cypress CY8CTMA140 touchscreens, Azoteq IQS269A capacitive touch controllers, Azoteq IQS620A pulse-width modulators, Texas Instruments K3 thermal sensors, Spreadtrum mailbox controllers, and Qualcomm inter-processor communication controllers. 
  * **Sound** : Microsemi ZL38060 connected home audio processors, NXP enhanced asynchronous sample rate converters, and Maxim integrated max98390 speaker amplifiers. 
  * **USB** : Qualcomm IPQ4019 USB PHYs, Qualcomm SNPS FEMTO USB HS PHYs, Cadence Salvo PHYs, and Intel ComboPHY subsystems. 



#### Networking

  * The "RDMA network block device" allows remote access to a block device over RDMA using the RTRS protocol; see [this documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/aa4d16e44f60) for details. 



#### Security-related

  * Mappings in `/dev/mem` will now be revoked if a device driver claims an overlapping memory range. This effectively prevents user space from mapping memory-addressable devices (persistent memory, for example), then playing havoc with the kernel if, for example, a filesystem stored in that memory is mounted later on. 
  * Mitigations for the ["special register buffer data sampling" hardware vulnerability](/Articles/822595/) have been merged; see [Documentation/admin-guide/hw-vuln/special-register-buffer-data-sampling.rst](/Articles/822596/) for more information. 



#### Virtualization and containers

  * The new `virtio-mem` device allows memory to be hot-plugged into (or unplugged from) a guest instance. Documentation is scarce (nonexistent, actually) but some information can be had from [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/5f1f79bbc9e2). 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The kcov code-coverage tool can now collect data from code running in software-interrupt mode. 
  * There is [a new set of locking functions](https://git.kernel.org/linus/9740ca4e95b4) to be used by code that obtains `mmap_sem`. The use of the lock is unchanged for now, but this is intended to be a first step toward improving the scalability of code protected by `mmap_sem`. 
  * The oldest version of GCC that can build the kernel is now 4.8. Torvalds has [noted](https://git.kernel.org/linus/4152d146ee21) that he is tempted to go one step further (to 4.9), so that change could happen in the near future. 
  * The [KCSAN](/Articles/816850/) data-race detector has been merged. Note that this tool requires the (not yet released) Clang 11 compiler to work properly; see [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/b791d1bdf921) for more information. 
  * The x86 kernel now has a section called `.noinstr.text` to hold code that should not ever be modified by instrumentation (such as kprobes). Various bits of sensitive code are being moved into that section; any calls from within `.noinstr.text` to code outside of the section must be specially marked; the `objtool` utility can enforce this requirement. See [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/076f14be7fc9) for a description of this work and its motivation. 



The 5.8 kernel has now entered into the stabilization phase, which can be expected to last until the final 5.8 release in early August.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.8](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.8)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
