# 5.9 Merge window, part 1 [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 7, 2020 

As of this writing, just over 3,900 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 5.9 kernel development cycle. While this merge window has just begun, there is already a significant set of new features to point out. 

#### Architecture-specific

  * Support for the [Unicore](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicore) architecture, which survived [a purge of unused architectures](/Articles/748074/) in 2018, has now been removed for real. 
  * X86 kernels can now be built using [Zstandard compression](https://facebook.github.io/zstd/). 
  * The x86 kernel currently provides a special device that allows access to the CPU's [model-specific registers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Model-specific_register). As described in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a7e1f67ed29f), though, providing that kind of access is asking for all kinds of trouble. As of 5.9, the kernel can filter MSR writes to an approved subset of registers, or block them entirely (which is the intended final goal). 
  * Support for the x86 FSGSBASE instructions has finally been merged, bringing [a long story](/Articles/821723/) to a close. This work allows safe and efficient access to the FS and GS segment base registers from user space. 



#### Core kernel

  * The [io_uring subsystem](/Articles/776703/) now has full support for asynchronous buffered read operations without the need to fall back to using kernel threads. Write support will be forthcoming in a future development cycle. 
  * The deadline scheduler has gained [capacity awareness](/Articles/821578/), meaning that it now makes correct decisions on asymmetric systems. See [this documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/65065fd70b5a) for details. 
  * There is a new sysctl knob named `sched_uclamp_util_min_rt_default`. It controls the default amount of CPU-frequency boosting that is applied when a realtime task runs, with the idea of limiting power usage on mobile systems. [This documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/1f73d1abe583) has (a bit) more information. 
  * The kernel's energy model, which until now only described the energy behavior of CPUs, has been extended to cover peripheral devices as well. See [this documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/7b7570ad0d76) for (some) more information. 
  * The new [`close_range()` system call](/Articles/789023/) allows a process to efficiently close a whole range of open file descriptors. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * The new Btrfs `rescue=` mount option is meant to be the future home of all rescue-oriented options; for now it just contains aliases of existing options. The `alloc_start` and `subvolrootid` options have been removed. 
  * Btrfs has also seen some performance improvements, especially around `fsync()` operations. 
  * [Inline encryption](/Articles/797309/) support was added in 5.8; in 5.9 that support will be provided in the ext4 and F2FS filesystems via the new `inlinecrypt` mount option. This allows these filesystems to make use of encryption support built into block-device controllers. 
  * The new `debugfs=` command-line option controls the availability of the debugfs filesystem. Setting it to `on` enables debugfs normally, while `off` disables it as if it were configured out of the kernel entirely. The `no-mount` option leaves debugfs enabled internally, but does not allow it to be mounted. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Crypto** : Silex Insight BA431 random number generators, TI K3 SA2UL crypto accelerators, and Ingenic random number generators. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : NVIDIA Tegra210 external memory controllers, Renesas RPC-IF SPI controllers, Corsair Commander Pro controllers, and Microchip Sparx5 SoC temperature sensors. 
  * **Regulator** : ChromeOS embedded-controller regulators, Qualcomm USB Vbus regulators, Qualcomm LAB/IBB regulators, Silergy SY8827N regulators, Fairchild FAN53880 regulators, and NXP PCA9450A/PCA9450B/PCA9450C regulators. 
  * **Systems-on-chip** : Intel Movidius (A.K.A. "Keem Bay"), Microchip Sparx5, and MStar/Sigmastar Armv7. 
  * **USB** : Xilinx ZynqMP PHYs, SAMSUNG SoC series UFS PHYs, Qualcomm IPQ806x DWC3 USB PHYs, and Ingenic X-series PHYs. 



#### Security-related

  * Kernels built with Clang can be configured to automatically initialize all on-stack variables to zero. As described in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/f0fe00d4972a), how Clang will support this feature in the future is unclear, so changes to this option are likely to be needed in response to future Clang releases. 
  * The seccomp subsystem, when used with [user-space notification](/Articles/756233/), now allows the supervisor process to inject file descriptors into the watched process. This enables full emulation of system calls that create new file descriptors. 
  * The new `CAP_CHECKPOINT_RESTORE` capability provides access to a number of features needed to checkpoint and restore processes without (other) privileges. This capability was [covered here](/Articles/822362/) (as `CAP_RESTORE`) in June. See [this merge commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/74858abbb103) for a description of the actions allowed by `CAP_CHECKPOINT_RESTORE`. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The `smp_read_barrier_depends()` barrier, which was only needed on the Alpha architecture, has been removed in favor of some smarter logic in `READ_ONCE()`. 
  * GCC 11 provides all of the features needed to support the [KCSAN](/Articles/802128/) data-race detector, so KCSAN can now be used with GCC-built kernels. 
  * The `uninitialized_var()` macro has been removed. Its purpose was to silence compiler warnings about variables that might be used without being initialized; in practice it has often ended up hiding bugs. 
  * A great deal of cleanup work in the kernel's entry and exit code in 5.8 has been topped off in 5.9 with a new set of generic entry and exit functions. There is necessarily a lot of architecture-specific work to be done on entry into the kernel, but the overall set of tasks — and the ordering relationships between them — are essentially the same. The new code, once adopted by the various architectures, should help to eliminate bugs in this area and prevent their reintroduction. See the commits for the [entry](https://git.kernel.org/linus/142781e108b1), [exit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a9f3a74a29af), and [interrupt](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a5497bab5f72) handlers for a better idea of how this all works. 



The 5.9 merge window can be expected to remain open through August 16. There are a number of significant repositories yet to be pulled, so chances are that the second-half summary, to be posted on LWN shortly after that date, will include many more changes. Stay tuned.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.9](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.9)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
