# 5.10 Merge window, part 1 [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 16, 2020 

As of this writing, 7,153 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline Git repository for the 5.10 release — over a period of four days. This development cycle is clearly off to a strong start. Read on for an overview of the significant changes merged thus far for the 5.10 kernel release. 

#### Architecture-specific

  * The arm64 architecture can now do performance-events monitoring over Arm's CMN-600 interconnect. 
  * The Arm v8.5 [memory tagging extension [PDF]](https://developer.arm.com/-/media/Arm%20Developer%20Community/PDF/Arm_Memory_Tagging_Extension_Whitepaper.pdf1) is now supported. This feature allows a four-bit tag to be assigned to every 16-byte "granule" in physical memory; whenever a pointer into a specific granule is dereferenced, the CPU will ensure that the tag stored in the pointer matches that assigned to the granule. Proper use of this extension can trap use-after-free and buffer-overflow bugs (and attempts to exploit those bugs). See [this article](/Articles/834289/) for more information on this feature. 
  * The ia64 performance-monitoring code has been removed. Few are likely to miss it, since it hasn't worked for years. 
  * AMD's "secure encrypted virtualization" (SEV) feature encrypts memory assigned to virtualized guests; Linux has supported SEV for a while. The new SEV-ES feature, merged for 5.10, expands SEV by encrypting the guest's processor registers as well, making them unavailable to the host unless the guest explicitly shares them. 



#### Core kernel

  * The io_uring subsystem now supports [the creation of restricted rings](/Articles/826053/) that can be passed safely to a less-trusted process. 
  * The [`pidfd_open()` system call](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/pidfd_open.2.html) now supports a `PIDFD_NONBLOCK` flag to create a non-blocking file descriptor. See [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/4da9af0014b5) for a thorough description of the semantics of non-blocking pidfds. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * The Btrfs filesystem has gained some significant performance improvements in `fsync()` operations. 
  * XFS has seen a bunch of work to resolve its year-2038 problems; timestamps in this filesystem are now good through 2468. Developers now have clear warning of a problem coming in 448 years, but chances are they will procrastinate on addressing it for at least 440 of them. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Graphics** : Lontium LT9611 DSI/HDMI bridges, Toshiba TC358775 DSI/LVDS bridges, Toshiba TC358762 DSI/DPI bridges, Mantix MLAF057WE51-X MIPI-DSI LCD panels, Cadence DPI/DP bridges, Samsung S6E63M0 RGB DSI interfaces, and NXP i.MX8MQ display controllers. 
  * **Hardware monitoring** : Analog Devices ADM1266 sequencers, MPS MP2975 multi-phase controllers, Intel MAX10 BMC monitoring chips, and Moortec Semiconductor MR75203 PVT controllers. 
  * **Industrial I/O** : Analog Devices ADXRS290 dual-axis MEMS gyroscopes, AMS AS73211 XYZ color sensors, and TI HDC2010 relative humidity and temperature sensors. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Amazon Annapurna Lab memory controllers, MediaTek MStar interrupt controllers, Xiphera XIP8001B true random number generators, Ingenic true random number generators, MCHP Sparx5 SDHC interfaces, Baikal-T1 SPI controllers, TI LP5036/30/24/18/12/9 LED controllers, Kontron sl28cpld interrupt/watchdog/PWM controllers, ENE KB3930 embedded controllers, Intel MAX 10 board management controllers, Kinetic KTD253 backlight drivers, Hisilicon 3670 SPMI controllers, Hisilicon Hi6421v600 SPMI power-management ICs, and Qualcomm SM8150 and SM8250 interconnect buses. 
  * **Pin control** : Qualcomm 8226 pin controllers, Actions Semi S500 pin controllers, Mediatek MT8192 and MT8167 pin controllers, Toshiba Visconti TMPV7700 series pin controllers, and Allwinner A100 pin controllers. 
  * **Regulator** : Richtek RT4801 regulators, Raspberry Pi 7-inch touchscreen panel ATTINY regulators, MediaTek MT6360 SubPMIC regulators, and Richtek RTMV20 load switch regulators. 
  * **Sound** : MediaTek MT6359 codecs, Microchip S/PDIF controllers, Cirrus Logic CS4234 codecs, and Texas Instruments TAS2764 mono audio amplifiers. 
  * **USB** : Hisilicon hi3670 USB PHYs, Mediatek MT6360 Type-C controllers, UniPhier AHCI PHYs, Intel Lightning Mountain USB PHYs, STMicroelectronics STUSB160x Type-C controllers, Maxim TCPCI based Type-C chips, and Qualcomm PMIC USB Type-C detectors. 
  * There is an entirely new user-space API for GPIO lines. Naturally, this API is rigorously undocumented, but some information can be gleaned from [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/b53911aa872d). 
  * The "raw" char device, which provides a classic Unix-style char interface to block devices, has been deprecated with the intention of removing it in the 5.14 release. The raw device was primarily used for direct I/O, which has been supported via the `O_DIRECT` flag since 2002. 



#### Security-related

  * Support for the RC4-HMAC-MD5 KerberosV algorithm has been removed from the crypto subsystem. This algorithm was created for compatibility with Windows 2000; according to [the commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/e33d2a7b3041), its removal ""should only adversely affect interoperability with Windows NT/2000 systems that have not received any updates since 2008 (but are connected to a network nonetheless)"". 
  * The [SM2 digital-signature algorithm](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-shen-sm2-ecdsa-02) is now supported. 
  * It is now possible to remove `security.selinux` extended attributes from files, but only before the SELinux policy is loaded. This makes it possible to "unlabel" files when SELinux is not being used. 



#### Virtualization and containers

  * Support for [Amazon Nitro enclaves](https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/nitro/nitro-enclaves/) has been added. See [Documentation/virt/ne_overview.rst](/Articles/834427/) for some more information. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The [seqcount latch](/Articles/831540/) specialized lock type has been added. 
  * "Orphan sections" — code or data sections that find their way into the kernel image without having been explicitly put there by the linker script — will now generate warnings during the kernel build. This change was made to protect the kernel from the possibility of unwanted changes in how linkers place those sections; the [merge changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/34eb62d868d7) describes orphan sections as ""a long-standing source of obscure bugs"". 
  * Static calls are a mechanism for performing indirect function calls with better performance, especially on systems where [retpolines](https://support.google.com/faqs/answer/7625886) would otherwise have to be used to protect against Spectre vulnerabilities. This mechanism has [been under development since 2018](/Articles/774743/#static); it was finally merged for 5.10. 
  * The `printk()` subsystem has gained a new lockless ring buffer meant to be a first step in resolving a number of problems in this area. See [this article](/Articles/800946/) for an overall description of the `printk()` work, including the new ring buffer. 
  * The minimum version of Clang needed to build the kernel is now 10.0.1. 



The 5.10 merge window can be expected to close on October 25, after which the stabilization portion of the development cycle will begin. Stay tuned for LWN's coverage of the second half of the 5.10 merge window, to be published shortly after the window closes.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.10](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.10)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
