# 5.11 Merge window, part 2 [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
December 28, 2020 

Linus Torvalds [released the 5.11-rc1 prepatch](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wg1+kf1AVzXA-RQX0zjM6t9J2Kay9xyuNqcFHWV-y5ZYw@mail.gmail.com/) and closed the 5.11 merge window on December 27. By that time, 12,498 non-merge changesets had been pulled into the mainline; nearly 2,500 of those wandered in after [the first merge-window summary](/Articles/840129/) was written. Activity slowed down in the second week, as expected, but there were still a number of interesting features that found their way into the mainline. 

#### Architecture-specific

  * The RISC-V architecture has gained support for the [contiguous memory allocator](/Articles/486301/), strict protection for `/dev/mem`, and interrupt-time accounting. 
  * [KASAN](/Articles/612153/) is now supported on 32-bit Arm systems. 
  * KASAN can now use the 64-bit Arm [memory tagging extension](/Articles/834289/) rather than software tagging and shadow memory. 



#### Core kernel

  * The [`epoll_pwait2()` system call](/Articles/837816/), which enables higher-resolution timeouts, has been added. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * The F2FS filesystem has gained new `ioctl()` calls giving user space control over which files are stored in compressed form. There is a new `compress_mode=` mount option controlling whether decisions about compression are made in kernel or user space. 
  * Overlayfs filesystems can now be mounted within a user namespace by an otherwise unprivileged process. According to [this commit message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/92dbc9dedccb), a full audit of overlayfs functions has been performed to try to ensure that overlayfs cannot be used to gain new privileges. 
  * The Ceph filesystem has gained support for [the "msgr2.1" protocol](https://docs.ceph.com/en/latest/dev/msgr2/), which enables encryption of transmitted data using AES-GCM. 
  * The XFS filesystem has a new "needs repair" bit; if this bit is set by the kernel, further mounts of that filesystem will be refused until it has been given a clean bill of health by the `xfs_repair` utility. 
  * The [dm-multipath](https://www.thegeekdiary.com/understanding-linux-multipath-using-dm-multipath/) device-mapper target has a new path selector that takes CPU affinity into account when choosing how to route I/O requests. The intent is to preserve CPU locality for systems that have been configured with that in mind, with possibly significant improvements in throughput. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Clock** : Qualcomm SC7180 camera clock controllers, Qualcomm SDX55 global clock controllers, Freescale FlexSPI clocks, and SiFive FU740 PRCI clock controllers. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : ARM MHUv2 mailbox controllers, Qualcomm Application Data Mover (ADM) DMA controllers, Qualcomm GPI DMA controllers, MStar MSC313 GPIO controllers, HiSilicon GPIO controllers, Intel LGM and Keem Bay pulse-width modulators, Synopsys DesignWare pulse-width modulators, and MIPI Alliance I3C host controller interfaces. 



#### Security-related

  * A new configuration option, concisely called "`DM_VERITY_VERIFY_ROOTHASH_SIG_SECONDARY_KEYRING`", allows the [dm-verity subsystem](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/admin-guide/device-mapper/verity.html) to verify hash signatures against certificates in the secondary trusted keyring. In practice, that allows verification against certificates loaded at run time rather than those built into the kernel itself; that, in turn, allows updating certificates without having to update the whole kernel. 



#### Virtualization and containers

  * User-mode Linux now supports suspend-to-idle; a suspended instance can be resumed with a `SIGUSR1` signal. 
  * The [virtio-mem mechanism](/ml/linux-kernel/20180523182404.11433-1-david@redhat.com/), which enables adding memory to (or removing memory from) virtual machines, has gained support for "[big block mode](/ml/linux-kernel/20201012125323.17509-1-david@redhat.com/)". In short, this allows memory to be added or removed in units larger than the host kernel's memory-block size, facilitating the use of huge pages (in the 1GB range) for guest memory. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The kernel build system will now fail with an error when building loadable modules lacking a `MODULE_LICENSE()` declaration. 
  * The use of `EXPORT_SYMBOL()` on static functions never made much sense; now it will generate an error at build time. 



Now the time has come to, as Torvalds said in the -rc1 announcement, ""go kick the tires"" and find the bugs that were inevitably added with all of that code. That process should lead to a reasonably stable 5.11 release that will, with luck, be released as a special Valentine's Day present in February.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.11](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.11)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
