# Exported-symbol changes in 5.13 [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
May 17, 2021 

There have been many disagreements over the years in the kernel community concerning the exporting of internal kernel symbols to loadable modules. Exporting a symbol often exposes implementation decisions to outside code, makes it possible to use (or abuse) kernel functionality in unintended ways, and makes future changes harder. That said, there is no authority overseeing the exporting of symbols and no process for approving exports; discussions only tend to arise when somebody notices a change that they don't like. But it is not particularly hard to detect changes in symbol exports from one kernel version to the next, and doing so can give some insights into the kinds of changes that are happening under the hood. 

The kernel has many thousands of functions and data structures; most of those are private to a given source file, while others are made available to the kernel as a whole. Loadable modules are special, though; they only have access to symbols that have been explicitly exported to them with `EXPORT_SYMBOL()` (or one of a few variants); many symbols that are available to code built into the kernel image are unavailable to loadable modules. The intent of this limitation is to keep the interface to modules relatively narrow and manageable. 

It is far from clear that this objective has been achieved, though. The 5.12 kernel exported 31,695 symbols to modules, which does not create an impression of a narrow interface. That number grew to 31,822 in 5.13-rc1. That is an increase of 127 symbols, but the actual story is a bit more complicated than that; 244 exported symbols were removed over this time, while 371 were added. The curious can see the full sets of added and removed symbols on [this page](/Articles/856313/). 

Some changes qualify more as a renaming than a removal or an addition. For example, `pmbus_do_probe()` is no longer exported in 5.13, at least in that form; it is now listed (using a notation your editor made up on the spot) as `PMBUS::pmbus_do_probe()`. In other words, this symbol has been moved out of the global namespace into a subsystem-specific one. [Namespacing for exported kernel symbols](/Articles/760045/) was added in 2018, but uptake has been relatively slow. The 5.13 kernel adds one new namespace (`PMBUS`) and that subsystem's exported symbols are moving into it. There are now 18 namespaces for symbols in the kernel: 

> `CRYPTO_INTERNAL`, `FIRMWARE_LOADER_PRIVATE`, `LTC2497`, `MCB`, `NVME_TARGET_PASSTHRU`, `PMBUS`, `SND_INTEL_SOUNDWIRE_ACPI`, `SND_SOC_SOF_INTEL_HDA_COMMON`, `SND_SOC_SOF_MERRIFIELD`, `SND_SOC_SOF_HDA_AUDIO_CODEC`, `SND_SOC_SOF_HDA_AUDIO_CODEC_I915`, `SND_SOC_SOF_INTEL_HIFI_EP_IPC`, `SND_SOC_SOF_INTEL_HIFI_EP_IPC`, `SND_SOC_SOF_ACPI_DEV`, `SND_SOC_SOF_PCI_DEV`, `SND_SOC_SOF_XTENSA`, `SOUNDWIRE_INTEL_INIT`, and `TEST_FIRMWARE`. 

The sound subsystem has clearly been the most enthusiastic user of symbol namespaces thus far. 

Many other changes in exported symbols are the result of code refactoring within the kernel. Some [optimizations](https://git.kernel.org/linus/5c88af59f9ab) in the bit-finding library caused functions like `find_first_bit()` to be turned into inline functions in header files, which need not be exported. But they fall back to functions like `_find_first_bit()`, which now _do_ need to be exported. The generic-sounding `vmem_map` symbol was specific to the ia64 architecture; it went away when ia64 dropped support for the `VMEMMAP` memory model. Various `wimax_` symbols disappeared along with the unloved WiMAX drivers that exported them. Functions like `rt_mutex_destroy()` were deleted because they were unused. 

Many of the new symbols correspond to new features; `alloc_pages()` came with [batch page allocation](/Articles/855226/), for example. Others are a bit less clear; what, for example, is `dotdot_name`? The [commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/80e5d1ff5d5f) that added this export explains it as ""useful constants: struct qstr for '..'"", which may be seen by some as less than fully enlightening. It provides a shortcut for filesystem code wanting to refer to directories named "`..`" without going to the trouble of wrapping it in the ["quick string" structure](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.13-rc1/source/include/linux/dcache.h#L40) used to pass strings around in the virtual filesystem layer. Several filesystems make use of it in 5.13. 

As a general rule, kernel symbols should not be exported unless there is a user of them in the mainline kernel. That rule is generally respected, but there are exceptions. As an example, [`zynqmp_pm_pinctrl_get_function()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.13-rc1/source/drivers/firmware/xilinx/zynqmp.c#L842) was exported in 5.13-rc1, but has no in-kernel users. The other `zynqmp_` (all related to functionality on Xilinx Zynq systems-on-chip) symbols that have been exported are not widely used and would be good candidates for hiding within their own namespace. Another exported-but-unused symbol is [`__cfi_slowpath_diag()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.13-rc1/source/kernel/cfi.c#L313), which is part of the Clang [control-flow integrity](/Articles/810077/) implementation that was merged in this cycle. The reason for the exporting of this symbol is not entirely clear. [`__cpu_dying_mask()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.13-rc1/source/kernel/cpu.c#L2524) was also [introduced and exported](https://git.kernel.org/linus/e40f74c535b8) in 5.13 with no in-kernel users. There are many others as well; "export it just in case" seems to be a fairly common reflex for kernel developers. 

The 5.13 kernel saw the addition of eleven `devm_` exports, plus two with the internal `__devm_` prefix. Not all of these are used either, but they do represent the type of symbol that one would expect to be exported to modules. These "managed device" functions are intended to make device drivers easier to write and safer by taking care of the freeing of allocated resources when a device is shut down. There are over 300 of these functions exported to modules now, and the list looks likely to continue to grow. 

The direct rendering manager (DRM) graphics subsystem added 17 `drm_` exports this time around. DRM is clearly one of the most complex driver APIs in the kernel, with no less than 850 exported symbols in 5.13. One begins to understand why the developers of this subsystem have prioritized documentation; this API would be unapproachable without it. That, of course, is a reflection of the problem space; graphics processors are complex devices. 

Given that it requires nearly 32,000 exported symbols for a "limited" module interface, the kernel as a whole is also a complex environment. That complexity is reflected in the increasing size of the interface it offers to user space, but also in the growing interface it presents to loadable modules. This interface has increased significantly in size over the years, often without a lot of review. The good news is that, as an internal kernel interface, the set of exported symbols can be changed at any time. So perhaps this list might shrink someday, but that will not happen in the 5.13 cycle.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Modules/Exported symbols](/Kernel/Index#Modules-Exported_symbols)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.13](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.13)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
