# Kernel topics on the radar [LWN.net]

> **Please consider subscribing to LWN**
> 
> Subscriptions are the lifeblood of LWN.net. If you appreciate this content and would like to see more of it, your subscription will help to ensure that LWN continues to thrive. Please visit [this page](/Promo/nst-nag1/subscribe) to join up and keep LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 2, 2021 

The kernel-development community is a busy place, with thousands of emails flying by every day and many different projects under development at any given time. Much of that work ends up inspiring articles at LWN, but there is no way to ever cover all of it, or even all of the most interesting parts. What follows is a first attempt at what may become a semi-regular LWN feature: a quick look at some of the work that your editor is tracking that may or may not show up as the topic of a full article in the future. The first set of topics includes memory folios, task isolation, and a lightweight threading framework from Google. 

#### Memory folios

The memory folios work was [covered here in March](/Articles/849538/); this patch set by Matthew Wilcox adds the concept of a "folio" as a page that is guaranteed not to be a tail page within a [compound page](/Articles/619514/). By guaranteeing that a folio is either a singleton page or the head of a compound page, this work enables the creation of an API that adds some useful structure to memory management, saves some memory, and slightly improves performance for some workloads. 

While the memory-management community is still not fully sold on this concept (it looks like a lot of change for a small benefit to some developers), it looks increasingly likely that it will be merged in the near future. Or, at least, the merging process will start; one does not swallow a 138-part (at last count) memory-management patch series in a single step. In mid-July, Wilcox [presented](/ml/linux-kernel/YPBs+hcxo31JanPM@casper.infradead.org/) his plan, which involves getting the first 89 patches merged for 5.15; the rest of the series would be merged during the following two development cycles. Nobody seems to be contesting that schedule at this point. 

Later in July, though, Wilcox [stumbled across](/ml/linux-kernel/YPxNkRYMuWmuRnA5@casper.infradead.org/) the inevitable [Phoronix benchmarking article](https://www.phoronix.com/scan.php?page=news_item&px=Folios-v14-Testing-AMD-Linux) which purported to show an 80% performance improvement for PostgreSQL with the folio patches applied to the kernel. He said that the result was ""plausibly real"" and suggested that, perhaps, the merging of folios should be accelerated. Other developers responded more skeptically, though. PostgreSQL developer Andres Freund looked at how the results were generated and [concluded](/ml/linux-kernel/20210724214413.fqsbjxhhodfzchs6@alap3.anarazel.de/) that the test ""doesn't end up measuring something particularly interesting"". His own test showed a 7% improvement, though, which is (as he noted) still a nice improvement. 

The end result is that the case for folios seems to be getting stronger, and the merging process still appears to be set to begin in 5.15. 

#### Retrying task isolation

Last year, the development community [discussed a task-isolation mode](/Articles/816298/) that would allow latency-sensitive applications to run on a CPU with no interruptions from the kernel. That work never ended up being merged, but the interest in this mode clearly still exists, as can be seen in [this patch set](/ml/linux-kernel/20210727103803.464432924@fuller.cnet/) from Marcelo Tosatti. It takes a simpler approach to the problem — initially, at least. 

This patch is focused, in particular, on kernel interruptions that can happen even when a CPU is running in the ["nohz" mode](/Articles/549580/) without a clock tick. Specifically, he is looking at the "vmstat" code that performs housekeeping for the memory-management subsystem. Some of this work is done in a separate thread (via a workqueue) that is normally disabled while a CPU is running in the nohz mode. There are situations, though, that can cause this thread to be rescheduled on a nohz CPU, ending the application's exclusive use of that processor. 

Tosatti's patch set adds a set of new [`prctl()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/prctl.2.html) commands to address this problem. The `PR_ISOL_SET` command sets the "isolation parameters", which can be either `PR_ISOL_MODE_NONE` or `PR_ISOL_MODE_NORMAL`; the latter asks the kernel to eliminate interruptions. Those parameters do not take effect, though, until the task actually enters the isolation mode, which can be done with the `PR_ISOL_ENTER` command. The kernel's response to entering the isolation mode will be to perform any deferred vmstat work immediately so that the kernel will not decide to do it at an inconvenient time later. The deferred-work cleanup will happen at the end of any system call made while isolation mode is active; since those system calls are the likely source of any deferred work in the first place, that should keep the decks clear while the application code is running. 

The evident intent is to make this facility more general, guaranteeing that _any_ deferred work would be executed right away. That led others (including [Nicolás Sáenz](/ml/linux-kernel/7b2d6bf91d30c007e19a7d2cbddcb2460e72d163.camel@redhat.com/)) to question the use of a single mode to control what will eventually be a number of different kernel operations. Splitting out the various behaviors would, he said, be a way to move any policy decisions to user space. After some back-and-forth, Tosatti [agreed](/ml/linux-kernel/20210727145209.GA518735@fuller.cnet/) to a modified interface that would give user space explicit control over each potential isolation feature. [A patch set](/ml/linux-kernel/20210730201827.269106165@fuller.cnet/) implementing this API was posted on July 30; it adds a new operation (`PR_ISOL_FEAT`) to query the set of actions that can be quiesced while the isolation mode is active. 

Bonus fact: newer members of our community may not be aware that, 20 years ago, Tosatti was known as [Marcelo the Wonder Penguin](https://web.archive.org/web/20011119051210/http://marcelothewonderpenguin.com/). 

#### User-managed concurrency groups

In May of this year, Peter Oskolkov posted [a patch set](/ml/linux-kernel/20210520183614.1227046-1-posk@google.com/) for a mechanism called "user-managed concurrency groups", or UMCG. This work is evidently a version of a scheduling framework known as "Google Fibers", which is naturally one of the most ungoogleable terms imaginable. This patch set has suffered from a desultory attempt to explain what it is actually supposed to implement, but the basic picture is becoming more clear over time. 

UMCG is meant to be a lightweight, user-space-controlled, M:N threading mechanism; [this document](/ml/linux-kernel/CAPNVh5feas6o_8pk5-kiujTDJf6XT4uxapxC4eZokaj%2Biv%3DrqQ%40mail.gmail.com/), posted after some prodding, describes its core concepts. A user-space process can set up one or more concurrency groups to manage its work. Within each group, there will be one or more "server" threads; the plan seems to be that applications would set up one server thread for each available CPU. There will also be any number of "worker" threads that carry out the jobs that the application needs done. At any given time, each server thread can be running one worker. User space will control which worker threads are running at any time by attaching them to servers; notifications for events like workers blocking on I/O allow the servers to be kept busy. 

In the [August 1 version of the patch set](/ml/linux-kernel/20210801200617.623745-1-posk@google.com/), there are two system calls defined to manage this mechanism. A call to `umcg_ctl()` will register a thread as an UMCG task, in either the server or the worker mode; it can also perform unregistration. `umcg_wait()` is the main scheduling mechanism; a worker thread can use it to pause execution, for example. But a server thread can also use `umcg_wait()` to wake a specific worker thread or to force a context switch from one worker thread to another; the call will normally block for as long as the worker continues to run. Once `umcg_wait()` returns, the server thread can select a new worker to execute next. 

Or so it seems; there is little documentation for how these system calls are really meant to be used and no sample code at all. The most recent version of the series did, finally, include [a description of the system calls](/ml/linux-kernel/20210801200617.623745-4-posk@google.com/), something that had been entirely absent in previous versions. Perhaps as a result, this work has seen relatively little review activity so far. Oskolkov seems to be focused on how the in-kernel functionality is implemented, but reviewers are going to want to take a long and hard look at the user-space API, which would have to be supported indefinitely if this subsystem were to be merged. UMCG looks like interesting and potentially useful work, but this kind of core-kernel change is hard to merge in the best of conditions; the absence of information on what is being proposed has made that process harder so far.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Memory management/Folios](/Kernel/Index#Memory_management-Folios)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Scheduler](/Kernel/Index#Scheduler)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [User-managed concurrency groups](/Kernel/Index#User-managed_concurrency_groups)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
