# The shrinking role of ETXTBSY [LWN.net]

> **LWN.net needs you!**
> 
> Without subscribers, LWN would simply not exist. Please consider [signing up for a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag2/subscribe) and helping to keep LWN publishing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 19, 2021 

Unix-like systems abound with ways to confuse new users, many of which have been present since long before Linux entered the scene. One consistent source of befuddlement is the "text file is busy" (`ETXTBSY`) error message that is delivered in response to an attempt to overwrite an executable image file. Linux is far less likely to deliver `ETXTBSY` results than it once was, but they do still happen on occasion. Recent work to simplify the mechanism behind `ETXTBSY` has raised a more fundamental question: does this error check have any value at all? 

The "text" that is busy in this case refers to a program's executable code — it's text that is read by the CPU rather than by humans. When a program is run, its executable text is mapped into the running process's address space. When this happens, Unix systems have traditionally prevented the file containing that text from being modified; the alternative is to allow the code being run to be changed arbitrarily, which rarely leads to happy outcomes. For extra fun, the changed code will only be read if it is faulted into RAM, meaning that said unhappy outcomes might not happen until hours (or days) after the file has been overwritten. Rather than repeatedly explain to users why their programs have crashed in mysterious ways, Unix kernel developers chose many years ago to freeze the underlying file while those programs run — leading to the need to explain `ETXTBSY` errors instead. 

Perhaps the easiest way to generate such an error is to try to rebuild a program while some process is still running it. Developers (those working in compiled languages, anyway) tend to learn early on to respond to "text file busy" errors by killing off the program they are debugging and rerunning `make`. 

#### How it works

Deep within the kernel, the [`inode` structure](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.13.10/source/include/linux/fs.h#L606) is used to represent files; one field within that structure is an `atomic_t` called `i_writecount`. Normally, this field can be thought of as a count of the number of times that the file is held open for writing. If, however, `i_writecount` is _less_ than zero, it is interpreted instead as a count of the number of times that the writing of this file is being blocked. If the file is an executable file, then each process that runs it will decrement `i_writecount` for the duration of that execution. This field thus functions as a sort of simple lock. If its value is negative, the file cannot be opened for write access; if, instead, its value is positive, attempts to block write access will fail. (Similarly, an attempt to execute a file that is currently open for writing will fail with `ETXTBSY`). 

In current kernels, it is possible to attempt to block write access with a call to [`deny_write_access()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.13.10/source/include/linux/fs.h#L3072), but the more common way is to create a memory mapping with the `VM_DENYWRITE` flag set. So, for example, the [`execve()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/execve.2.html) system call will map the code sections of the executable file into memory with `VM_DENYWRITE`; that mapping causes `i_writecount` to be decremented (this will fail if the file is open for writing, of course). When the mapping goes away (the running program exits or calls `execve()`), `i_writecount` will be incremented again; if it reaches zero, the file will once again become writable. 

Back in the early days of Linux, prior to the Git era, the [`mmap()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/mmap.2.html) system call supported a flag called `MAP_DENYWRITE` that would cause `VM_DENYWRITE` to be set within the kernel and thus block write access to the mapped file for the duration of the mapping. There was a problem with this option, though: any process that could open a file for read access could map it with `MAP_DENYWRITE` and prevent any other process on the system from writing that file. That is, at best, an invitation to denial-of-service attacks, so it was removed long ago. Calls to `mmap()` with that flag set will succeed, but the flag is simply ignored. 

#### Shared libraries

The removal of `MAP_DENYWRITE` had an interesting, if obscure, side effect. One may think of a file, such as `/usr/bin/cat`, as containing an executable program. In truth, though, much of the code that will be executed when somebody runs `cat` is not found in that file; instead, it is in a vast number of shared libraries. Those files contain executable code just like the nominal executable file, so one would think that they, too, would be protected from writing while in use. 

Once upon a time, that was indeed the case; the ancient [`uselib()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/uselib.2.html) system call will map libraries with writing blocked. It may well be, though, that there are no systems still using `uselib()`; instead, on current systems, shared libraries are mapped from user space with `mmap()`. The `MAP_DENYWRITE` flag was created for just this use case, so that shared libraries could not be written while in use. When `MAP_DENYWRITE` went away, so did that protection; current Linux systems will happily allow a suitably privileged user to overwrite in-use, shared libraries. 

The end result of this history is that the memory-management subsystem has a bunch of leftover code, in the form of the support for `MAP_DENYWRITE` and `VM_DENYWRITE`, that no longer has any real purpose. So David Hildenbrand [decided to take it out](/ml/linux-kernel/20210812084348.6521-1-david@redhat.com/). With this patch set installed, `execve()` will simply call `deny_write_access()` directly, and `mmap()` no longer has to consider that case at all. This results in a user-space API change: `uselib()` no longer blocks write access to shared libraries. Nobody expects anybody to notice. 

#### An idea whose time has passed?

In response to Hildenbrand's patch set, GNU C library developer Florian Weimer [pointed out](/ml/linux-kernel/87r1eyg8h6.fsf@oldenburg.str.redhat.com/) that the library has ""a persistent issue with people using cp (or similar tools) to replace system libraries"". He did not say that library developers have long since tired of explaining to those users why their applications crashed in mysterious ways, but there was no need to. It would be nice, he said, to provide a way to prevent this sort of error or, at least, a way to deterministically tell that a crash was caused by an overwritten library. There are a number of ways that could be established without bringing back `MAP_DENYWRITE`, he said. 

The discussion wandered into other ways to protect shared libraries from being overwritten while in use; Eric Biederman [suggested](/ml/linux-kernel/87o8a2d0wf.fsf@disp2133/) installing them with the immutable bit set, for example. But Linus Torvalds [made it clear](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wgru1UAm3kAKSOdnbewPXQMOxYkq9PnAsRadAC6pXCCMQ@mail.gmail.com/) that he thought the problem was elsewhere: 

> The kernel ETXTBUSY thing is purely a courtesy feature, and as people have noticed it only really works for the main executable because of various reasons. It's not something user space should even rely on, it's more of a "ok, you're doing something incredibly stupid, and we'll help you avoid shooting yourself in the foot when we notice". 

After Torvalds repeated that point a couple of times, Andy Lutomirski [suggested](/ml/linux-kernel/b629cda1-becd-4725-b16c-13208ff478d3@www.fastmail.com/) just removing the write-blocking mechanism altogether: 

> It’s at best erratic — it only applies for static binaries, and it has never once saved me from a problem I care about. If the program I’m recompiling crashes, I don’t care — it’s probably already part way through dying from an unrelated fatal signal. What actually happens is that I see -ETXTBUSY, think “wait, this isn’t Windows, why are there file sharing rules,” then think “wait, Linux has *one* half baked file sharing rule,” and go on with my life. 

Torvalds [was amenable to the idea](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wiJ0u33h2CXAO4b271Diik=z4jRt64=Gt6YV2jV4ef27g@mail.gmail.com/), though he worried that some application somewhere might depend on the `ETXTBSY` behavior. But he noted that it has been steadily weakened over time, and nobody has complained so far. Removing it could be tried, he [continued](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wgi2+OSk2_uYwhL56NGzN8t2To8hm+c0BdBEbuBuzhg6g@mail.gmail.com/): ""Worst comes to worst, we'll have to put it back, but at least we'd know what crazy thing still wants it"". 

Al Viro [worried](/ml/linux-kernel/YRcjCwfHvUZhcKf3@zeniv-ca.linux.org.uk/), though, that some installation scripts might depend on this behavior; Christian Brauner [added](/ml/linux-kernel/20210814075333.7333bxduk4tei57i@wittgenstein/) that allowing busy executable files to be written could make some security exploits easier. Hildenbrand [said](/ml/linux-kernel/f65e3462-a5aa-0c77-494b-916eb832ebe1@redhat.com/) that his patch set already makes the write-blocking behavior much simpler, and that he would be in favor of leaving it in place for now. The [second version of the patch set](/ml/linux-kernel/20210816194840.42769-1-david@redhat.com/), posted on August 16, retains the `ETXTBSY` behavior for the main executable file. 

Hildenbrand's simplification work seems sure to land during the 5.15 merge window; whether `ETXTBSY` will disappear entirely is rather less certain. Getting rid of it strikes some developers as a nice cleanup, but there is nothing forcing that removal to happen at this time. Meanwhile, the potential for user-space regressions always exists when behavior is changed in this way. The safe approach is thus to leave `ETXTBSY` in place for now. 

[**Postscript** : Lutomirski pointed to mandatory locks as the one other place in the kernel that implements unwelcome file-sharing rules. That feature is indeed unpopular; the [kernel document on mandatory locks](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/filesystems/mandatory-locking.html) starts with a section on why they should not be used. In 2015, [a configuration option](/Articles/667210/) was added to make mandatory locks optional, and some distributors have duly disabled them. One potential outcome of the `ETXTBSY` discussion looks likely to be [an effort](/ml/linux-kernel/87k0kkxbjn.fsf_-_@disp2133/) to get other distributors to do the same until it becomes clear that mandatory locks can safely be removed. Stay tuned.]  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [System calls/mmap()](/Kernel/Index#System_calls-mmap)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
