# The rest of the 5.15 merge window [LWN.net]

> **Benefits for LWN subscribers**
> 
> The primary benefit from [subscribing to LWN](/Promo/nst-nag5/subscribe) is helping to keep us publishing, but, beyond that, subscribers get immediate access to all site content and access to a number of extra site features. Please sign up today! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
September 13, 2021 

Linus Torvalds [released 5.15-rc1](/Articles/869030/) and closed the merge window for this release on September 12; at that point, 10,471 non-merge changesets had found their way into the mainline repository. Those changesets contain a lot of significant changes and improvements. Read on for a summary of what came into the mainline in the roughly 7,000 changesets pulled since our [first-half summary](/Articles/867821/) was written. 

#### Architecture-specific

  * As expected, [scheduling support](/Articles/838339/) for asymmetric Arm systems has been merged. See [this documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/702f43872665) for details. 
  * Arm64 kernels can now be built as Hyper-V clients. 
  * The ARC architecture now supports three-level and four-level page tables; this is evidently a step toward the eventual support for 64-bit processors. 



#### Core kernel

  * The [`printk()` indexing](/Articles/857148/) patch set has been merged. This feature allows the extraction of a list of all messages that can be emitted by `printk()`; user-space monitoring utilities can use this list to detect changes. 
  * Memory usage accounting for memory control groups has been extended to track many more in-kernel data structures, including those created for polling, signal handling, namespaces, and more. Some of those changes have since been reverted, though, due to the performance regression they caused. 
  * The memory-management subsystem has gained the ability to demote pages to a slower NUMA node in favor of reclaiming them entirely. This mechanism can move less-used pages to nodes hosting nonvolatile memory, which is better than discarding them. This is one piece of the tiered memory-management scheme described in [this article](/Articles/857133/). 
  * The [multi-preference memory policy](/Articles/862707/#many) patch has been merged; it allows a process to request that memory pages be allocated on a given set of NUMA nodes. 
  * The new [`process_mrelease()` system call](/Articles/864184/) allows a supervisor process to hasten the reclaim of memory from an exiting process. 
  * As described in [this article](/Articles/866493/), the code implementing the `MAP_DENYWRITE` option to `mmap()` has been removed. As a consequence, the number of situations where a write to a file will be denied with an `ETXTBSY` error has been reduced; see [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/49624efa65ac) for a concise list. 
  * "Event probes" are a new type of kernel probe that attach to an existing trace event but which contain their own format string; they can be used to provide a new view of an existing tracepoint. [This commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/7491e2c44278) contains a brief description of how they are used. 
  * The [DAMON subsystem](/Articles/812707/) has been merged. DAMON allows the monitoring and optimization of memory management from user space. [This documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/c4ba6014aec3) contains more information. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * It is no longer possible to turn off disk quota accounting in mounted XFS filesystems. _Enforcement_ can be turned off, but tracking will continue to happen under the hood. From [the pull request](https://git.kernel.org/linus/90c90cda05ae): ""We've tried to do this in a careful enough way that there shouldn't be any user visible effects aside from quotaoff no longer randomly hanging the system"". 
  * XFS now supports filesystems containing dates after 2038. This support has been present for a while but is no longer considered experimental. 
  * The EROFS filesystem now supports direct I/O on uncompressed files. 
  * Overlay filesystems now properly handle the immutable, append-only, sync, and noatime attributes. 
  * A new NTFS filesystem implementation, said to be far better than the kernel's existing version, has been merged. There were [some questions](/Articles/866112/#ntfs) about whether this filesystem would make it into 5.15, but it seems that the doubts felt by some filesystem maintainers have been adequately addressed. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Clock** : Qualcomm SC7280 clock controllers, Qualcomm MSM8953 global clock controllers, Qualcomm MSM8994 multimedia clock controllers, Qualcomm SM6350, SM6115 and SM4250 global clock controllers, and MediaTek MT8192 clock controllers. 
  * **Graphics** : Innolux EJ030NA 320x480 LCD panels, Widechips WS2401 DPI panels, Samsung ATNA33XC20 eDP panels, and Ilitek ILI9341 240x320 QVGA panels. 
  * **Industrial I/O** : Sensirion SGP40 gas sensors, Analog Devices AD5110 digital potentiometers, and Renesas RZ/G2L analog-to-digital converters. 
  * **Media** : Amlogic Meson IR transmitters, Sony imx335 and imx412 image sensors, and OmniVision OV9282 sensors. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Xilinx Versal FPGAs, General Electric ACHC microcontrollers, Nintendo Wii consoles, Qualcomm SC8180X interconnects, Realtek RTL8188EU Wireless LAN NICs (replacement driver, still in staging), Intel IXP4xx expansion bus interfaces, Renesas RZ/G2L USB/PHY controllers, Apple DART I/O memory-management units, Renesas I2C-controlled synchronization management units, MediaTek CPU-frequency controllers, Renesas RZ/G2L DMA controllers, and NVIDIA Tegra30 thermal sensors. 
  * **PCI** : Rockchip DesignWare PCIe controllers, Toshiba Visconti PCIe controllers, and Keem Bay PCIe controllers. 
  * **Pin control** : Qualcomm 9607 pin controllers, Qualcomm SM6115 and SM4250 pin controllers, STMicroelectronics STM32MP135 pin controllers, NXP i.MX8ULP pin controllers, Intel Keem Bay pin controllers, and Renesas RZ/G2L pin and GPIO controllers. 
  * **Sound** : Renesas RZ/G2L serial sound interfaces. 



#### Security-related

  * The kernel can now be built with the GCC `-fzero-call-used-regs=used-gpr` option; in English, that means that any registers used within a function will be zeroed just before returning from that function. This helps to prevent data from leaking out of functions; it also, as Kees Cook [noted](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a82adfd5c7cb) in the changelog, ""helps reduce the number of useful ROP [return-oriented programming] gadgets in the kernel image by about 20%"". 



#### Virtualization and containers

  * The new, fully undocumented gpio-virtio driver allows guests to access GPIO lines provided by the host system. 
  * There is a new driver framework called "VDUSE" that allows the implementation of virtual block devices in user space, with a Virtio transport to the guest. See [this documentation commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/7bc7f61897b6) for some more information. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * [Restricted DMA pools](/Articles/841916/) can be used to place limits on the pages a DMA-capable device can access on systems without an I/O memory-management unit. 
  * Kernel builds will now use the `-Werror` flag by default, causing the build to fail in the presence of compiler warnings. There is a new `WERROR` configuration variable that can be used to turn this option off; it is meant to be used in cases where a very new (or old) compiler is generating spurious warnings. This change is causing build failures for some but, so far, Torvalds [is unsympathetic](/ml/linux-next/CAHk-=wgSzN4p0EW2LkA0YkRBjkOXpdaiLZMez=h=3d4Q2Gjp3A@mail.gmail.com/): 

> So the fact that *I* require a clean build, and generally have to reject a couple of build requests every merge window because of that clearly doesn't mean that we actually have clean builds. 
> 
> I've had that "no warnings" requirement for years. And that means that *my* build has been clean for years. 
> 
> I want *all* builds to be clean, or at least as far as possible. 

Even so, Torvalds eventually applied [this patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/b339ec9c229a) setting the `WERROR` configuration variable to match the value of `COMPILE_TEST` to minimize the pain felt by kernel builders worldwide. [Yet another patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/49832c819ab8) silences the warning GCC issues when the name `main` is used for anything but a function. 
  * When the Clang compiler is used to build the kernel, the LLVM integrated assembler will also be used by default. 
  * The SLUB allocator has seen a significant rewrite to minimize its disabling of interrupts and make it compatible with realtime preemption. See [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/cc09ee80c3b1) for some more information. 
  * It is no longer possible to create executable mappings with `ioremap()`. 
  * Much of the kernel documentation has been translated into traditional Chinese. 




Notably not pulled was the folio patch set; see [this article](/Articles/868598/) for more information on that subject. 

In general, this merge window has been relatively difficult — or, as Torvalds [put it](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wguv1zB0h99LKH1UpjNvcg7tsckE_udYr3AP=2aEUdtwA@mail.gmail.com/): ""This has not been one of those smooth merge windows that we occasionally have"". Hopefully the stabilization period will be a bit less rough. If all goes well and the nine-week schedule sticks, we'll have the final 5.15 release as an extra Halloween treat on October 31.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.15](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.15)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
