# The new Debian kernel team [LWN.net]

Herbert Xu was the maintainer of a surprising number of core Debian packages, including the i386 and Alpha kernels. Unfortunately, Mr. Xu became upset over the Debian Project's perceived recognition of Taiwan as a separate country, and [resigned from the project](/Articles/86925/) on May 5. Many of his packages have been picked up by others or have gone into the orphan state, but the kernel packages are important enough to require more careful handling. 

The actual process of selecting the new kernel maintainer would appear to have been done in private; we were not able to get an answer from the Debian leader about just how it was done. The results have now [been made public](/Articles/86927/), however. The Debian kernel will now be maintained by a team, with William Lee Irwin and Al Viro at the core. Additional helpers include Troy Benjegerdes, Dann Frazier, Goto Masanori, Christoph Hellwig, Benjamin Herrenschmidt, Anton Blanchard, and Arjan van de Ven. 

In other words, Debian will now have a set of kernel packages maintained by active kernel developers. This should help to improve the quality of Debian's kernels (though, it should be said, complaints about Mr. Xu's kernels were rare) and to improve the feedback from Debian into the kernel development process. Mr. Irwin's plans include "aggressive mainline tracking" and, eventually, a unified source package for all architectures supported by Debian. Expect some interesting things from the Debian kernel in the near future.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Debian kernel team](/Kernel/Index#Debian_kernel_team)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
