# A disagreement over get_mm_exe_file() [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
October 18, 2021 

Differences of opinion over which kernel symbols should be exported to loadable modules have been anything but uncommon over the years. Often, these disagreements relate to which kernel capabilities should be available to proprietary modules. Sometimes, though, it hinges on the disagreements over the best way to solve a problem. The recent discussion around the removal of an export for a core kernel function is a case in point. 

Loadable modules, of course, are chunks of kernel code that are loaded into the core kernel after the system boots. Most modules are device drivers, but a surprising amount of kernel functionality can be built in modular form. While code that is built into the kernel can use any symbol that is accessible via the usual C scoping rules, loadable modules are rather more constrained; they can only use symbols that have been explicitly exported to them. In theory, the exported-symbol interface is tightly regulated; in practice, tens of thousands of symbols have been exported over the years without a lot of oversight. That said, the community still sees occasional disagreements when a module developer wants to use a symbol that core-kernel developers do not wish to export. 

The AMD GPU developers have recently run into a problem. While much user-space graphics code has long since moved over to using the [atomic mode-setting API](/Articles/653071/), it would seem that Chrome OS has only partially made that transition. By using a mix of old and new(ish) APIs, Chrome OS can get itself into a position where the hardware will no longer cooperate with it; to prevent that from happening, the amdgpu driver restricts the use of overlay planes for all clients. [This message from Simon Ser](https://lore.kernel.org/amd-gfx/JIQ_93_cHcshiIDsrMU1huBzx9P9LVQxucx8hQArpQu7Wk5DrCl_vTXj_Q20m_L-8C8A5dSpNcSJ8ehfcCrsQpfB5QG_Spn14EYkH9chtg0=@emersion.fr/) describes the situation in more detail and, undoubtedly, more correctly. 

This restriction makes Chrome OS work, but it also unnecessarily constrains other clients that do not mix the APIs in this way. In an attempt to get around this problem, Ser [added a patch](https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/agd5f/linux/-/commit/0d4da915c7098eca2aa6f559f42e33b5e9c7c5e8) that calls [`get_mm_exe_file()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.15-rc5/source/kernel/fork.c#L1249) to get the name of the program that user space is running. If (and only if) that name is `chrome`, the restriction on overlay planes is enforced. This allows Chrome OS to continue working in its accustomed manner while giving more freedom to other clients. 

What Ser didn't know was that, back in September, Christoph Hellwig had [removed the export for that function](https://git.kernel.org/linus/05da8113c9ba), making it unavailable to loadable modules. Once Ser's patch hit linux-next, its reference to a symbol that was no longer exported caused the build to break; linux-next maintainer Stephen Rothwell then duly [reported the break](/ml/linux-next/20211008113116.4bdd7b6c@canb.auug.org.au/) back to the relevant maintainers. At that point, Ser became aware that his change was not going to work in the mainline kernel. 

Ser's first response was to [ask](/ml/linux-next/_POw9ikafXoqSFqiOb8SZb_uvRZ4okgD4qrl4EtJ0UBiQTV7pwV3pJIM20eIzmpuFWDeBF9NPD00r72ttX0mZZ0bNeH_J44MoaB-jfjrQSU=@emersion.fr/) whether `get_mm_exe_file()` could be exported once again, since the amdgpu driver now uses it. Hellwig [made it clear](/ml/linux-next/20211011073348.GA10672@lst.de/) that he was not interested in doing that. In that message and those that followed, Hellwig was rather less than polite in his explanations, even after Ser requested a change of tone. There was, however, a real point to be made despite the way in which it was conveyed. 

Why should the kernel not export `get_mm_exe_file()`? Hellwig's point is that kernel code should never vary its behavior based on the name of the program that is running in user space. That name is entirely under the control of user space and can change at any time, either for malicious reasons or just in the course of normal development. Beyond that, Chrome OS will, one assumes, eventually be fixed to no longer mix APIs in this way, at which point the check in the amdgpu driver will no longer be necessary, and may indeed be harmful. There will be no way to know, though, when that check can be taken out. So this little quirk, based on the name of the running program, is likely to stay around for a long time, long past when it is actually useful. 

The problem remains, though, that changing the behavior of the amdgpu driver will break existing Chrome OS systems. The correct solution, according to Hellwig, is to require user space to explicitly opt into the less-constrained behavior. Chrome OS will not take that option and will continue to work; more modern applications can request that the restriction be removed. Ser [didn't like this solution](/ml/linux-next/eOlxebs_u0NKPwzSFL2q48CRHVKEXqiWyoQcHWDsG5qHnhrrphhwczUtgd4bE1o1988Jja35uxf3pWwn2lU8I_5Tmyk1WzeKYQ7yi9qS4sc=@emersion.fr/): ""No, we can't have a 'I_AM_NOT_BROKEN' ioctl for each and every uAPI mis-use. User-space detection has been determined to be the best course of action."" Hellwig [stood firm](/ml/linux-next/20211011080135.GA11242@lst.de/) in his insistence that, if an API change breaks user space, the only correct solution is a new call to enable that new behavior. 

On October 14, Ser [reverted the patch in question](https://lore.kernel.org/amd-gfx/20211014153433.169454-1-contact@emersion.fr/T/#u) in the amdgpu tree. It does not appear that the separate API call is forthcoming, though; instead, it looks like the original patch will just be carried in the Chrome OS kernel instead. That, too, is a reasonable solution to this problem; the Chrome OS developers will know when they can drop that patch and, meanwhile, it will not clutter up the mainline kernel. 

This little episode shows how control over the exporting of symbols to modules is used to constrain what those modules can do in the hope of improving the quality of the kernel's code base as a whole. The end result in this case looks to be headed in the right direction, even if the path to that solution was more unpleasant than it needed to be. The kernel project has gotten better over the years at upholding technical standards while treating developers in a respectful way, but there is clearly still progress to be made on both fronts.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Modules/Exported symbols](/Kernel/Index#Modules-Exported_symbols)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
