# The first half of the 5.17 merge window [LWN.net]

> **Ready to give LWN a try?**
> 
> With a subscription to LWN, you can stay current with what is happening in the Linux and free-software community and take advantage of subscriber-only site features. We are pleased to offer you **[a free trial subscription](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-trial/claim)** , no credit card required, so that you can see for yourself. Please, join us! 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
January 13, 2022 

As of this writing, just short of 7,000 non-merge commits have been pulled into the mainline kernel repository for the 5.17 release. The changes pulled thus far bring new features across the kernel; read on for a summary of what has been merged during the first half of the 5.17 merge window. 

#### Architecture-specific

  * The arm64 architecture has gained support for the [kernel concurrency sanitizer](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/dev-tools/kcsan.html) (KCSAN). 
  * 32-Bit Arm systems now support [KFENCE](https://docs.kernel.org/dev-tools/kfence.html). 
  * The boot-time memtest memory tester is now available on the m68k architecture. 
  * The new "AMD P-State" subsystem is a power-control mechanism for upcoming AMD processors that, it is said, offers significantly better performance. See [this documentation commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/c22760885fd6) for more information. 



#### Core kernel

  * The [`bpf_loop()` helper](/Articles/877062/) is an alternative way of implementing (some) loops in BPF programs; it can improve performance and ease the task of getting loops past the BPF verifier. 
  * The ["compile once/run everywhere" (CO-RE) mechanism](https://nakryiko.com/posts/bpf-core-reference-guide/), formerly implemented in user space, now runs within the kernel. This is a step toward the eventual implementation of signed BPF programs and also makes BPF functionality more readily available to languages like Go. 
  * The scheduler now tracks forced-idle time — the time that an SMT sibling processor is forced into the idle state as the result of [core-scheduling](/Articles/861251/) constraints. This information, which can be used to evaluate the cost of enabling core scheduling, can be found in `/proc/_PID_ /sched`. 
  * The `RCU_FAST_NO_HZ` configuration option, meant for advanced tweaking of the RCU algorithm on tickless CPUs, [has been removed](https://git.kernel.org/linus/e2c73a6860bd). It seems that no actual users of this feature could be found. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * [ID-mapped filesystem mounts](/Articles/837566/) can now be made on top of filesystems that are, themselves, ID-mapped. [This merge commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/5dfbfe71e324) has some more information. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Graphics** : the direct rendering subsystem has gained support for electronic privacy screens, as found on various laptop models. Also: JDI R63452 Full HD DSI panels, Ilitek ILI9163 display panels, Novatek NT35950 DSI panels, Boe BF060Y8M-AJ0 panels, Sony Tulip Truly NT35521 panels, and R-Car DU MIPI DSI encoders. 
  * **Hardware monitoring** : Texas Instruments INA238 power monitors, ASUS WMI B550/X570 and X370/X470/B450/X399 hardware monitoring interfaces, Delta AHE-50DC fan control modules, Renesas RZ/G2L thermal sensors, MPS MP5023 hardware monitoring interfaces, and NZXT fan controllers. 
  * **Media** : STMicroelectronics STM32 Chrom-Art accelerators, Maxim MAX96712 quad GMSL2 deserializers, OmniVision OV5693 sensors, and various codecs with VP9 support. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Apple PMGR power-state controllers, R-Car Gen4 system controllers, Samsung Exynos universal serial interfaces, StarFive JH7100 clock generators, StarFive JH7100 reset controllers, Marvell CN10K performance-monitoring units, HiSilicon PCIe performance-monitoring units, Marvell CN10K random number generators, Letsketch WP9620N tablets, Maxim MAX77976 battery chargers, Lenovo Yoga Book tablets, Siemens Simatic LED controllers, Siemens Simatic IPC watchdogs, Asus TF103C 2-in-1 keyboard docks, Renesas R-Car Gen3 and RZ/N1 NAND controllers, TI TPS68470 PMIC regulators, and Maxim MAX20086-MAX20089 camera power protectors. 
  * **Networking** : Engleder TSN endpoint Ethernet MACs, Microchip Lan966x network switches, Vertexcom MSE102x SPI interfaces, and Mellanox Spectrum-4 Ethernet switches. 
  * **Pin control** : Qualcomm SDX65 and SM8450 pin controllers, StarFive JH7100 pin controllers, NXP IMXRT1050 pin controllers, and Intel Thunder Bay pin controllers. 



#### Networking

  * The [reference-count tracking infrastructure](/Articles/877603/) has been added. This mechanism should help developers track down the source of reference-count bugs. For now it is specific to the networking subsystem but should be relatively easily extended to other parts of the kernel. 
  * The new "converged security and management engine" module allows communication with the Intel management engine (the separate processor lurking within Intel CPUs) via WiFi. 
  * Support for offloading traffic-control actions to network devices has been added; some information can be found in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/434ed2138994). 
  * The [management component transport protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Management_Component_Transport_Protocol) (MCTP) is now supported over serial devices. MCTP support over SMBus was also merged but subsequently [reverted](https://git.kernel.org/linus/2f6a470d6545) after the I2C maintainer complained about not having been involved in the necessary I2C core changes. 



#### Security-related

  * The kernel's random-number generator has switched from the SHA1 hash algorithm to BLAKE2s, which is both faster and more secure. 



#### Virtualization and containers

  * User-mode Linux can now be booted with a devicetree blob, facilitating testing of driver code. 
  * The Xen USB virtual host driver allows access to USB devices to be passed through to Xen guests. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The `struct page` fields used by the slab allocators have been moved into a separate structure. An early version of this work was covered in [this article](/Articles/871982/); it has since been pushed further by Vlastimil Babka. 
  * KCSAN has [gained the ability to detect some missing memory barriers](/Articles/877200/). Some more information can be found in [this documentation commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/82eb6911d909). 
  * The new gpio-sim module creates simulated GPIO chips for testing; see [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/cb8c474e79be) for more information. 
  * The kernel is now built with `-Wcast-function-type`, which generates a warning when function pointers are cast to an incompatible type. This check is necessary to avoid setting off [control-flow integrity](/Articles/856514/) alarms. 



There are currently about 4,000 changesets sitting in linux-next, suggesting that activity will be a bit slower for the rest of the merge window. That said, there are undoubtedly some interesting changes yet to land in the mainline; that should happen by the time the merge window closes on January 23. Stay tuned for our second-half summary, which will arrive shortly after that date.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.17](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.17)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
