# 5.18 Merge window, part 1 [LWN.net]

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 25, 2022 

As of this writing, 4,127 non-merge changesets have found their way into the mainline repository for the 5.18 development cycle. That may seem like a relatively slow start to the merge window, but there are a lot of changes packed into those commits. Read on for a summary of the most significant changes to land in the first half of the 5.18 merge window.   


#### Architecture-specific

  * 32-Bit Arm systems have gained support for separate interrupt stacks and [virtually-mapped kernel stacks](/Articles/692208/). 
  * Support for older Arm systems (ARMv4 and ARMv5) without a memory-management unit has been removed. MMU-less support for ARMv7-M systems remains, though. 
  * The arm64 architecture supports the new "QARMA3" pointer-authentication algorithm. This variant of Arm's QARMA is evidently faster while still being sufficiently secure. 
  * Arm64 systems can be built with shadow-stack support using the GCC 12 compiler release. 
  * The PA-RISC architecture now has [minimal vDSO support](https://git.kernel.org/linus/df24e1783e6e) which, in turn, enables the system to run with a non-executable stack for the first time. The initial version of this patch was [posted in 2006](https://lore.kernel.org/linux-parisc/4544A34A.6080700@tausq.org/); some things take longer than others to get into the mainline, it seems. 
  * Support for the Intel "hardware feedback interface" has been added. This mechanism allows the hardware to inform the kernel about the current performance and energy-efficiency capability of each CPU in the system. These capabilities can change over time as the result of, for example, thermal constraints. [This documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/4a960e8941bd) has some more information. 
  * Support for the nds32 architecture has been removed. According to [the merge changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/194dfe88d62e): 

> The hardware is still used and the code is in reasonable shape, but the mainline port is not actively maintained any more, as all remaining users are thought to run vendor kernels that would never be updated to a future release. 




> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

#### Core kernel

  * The [io_uring subsystem](/Articles/776703/) has seen a number of improvements. The new `IORING_SETUP_SUBMIT_ALL` option will cause a full batch of requests to be submitted even if an error is encountered partway through. The file descriptors for the ring itself can be registered with the ring, providing a performance improvement for threaded applications; see [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/e7a6c00dc77a) for some details. The new [`IORING_OP_MSG_RING` operation](https://git.kernel.org/linus/4f57f06ce218) allows one ring to signal another. Finally, it is now possible to [perform the NAPI busy poll](https://git.kernel.org/linus/adc8682ec690) on sockets directly from the ring. 
  * Support for the a.out executable format is no longer built by default for the alpha and m68k architectures — the last two that were still using it. The a.out code has not actually been removed yet but [that is probably coming soon](/Articles/888741/). 
  * Some tweaks to the restartable-sequences API have been merged in preparation for [support in the GNU C Library](/Articles/883104/). 
  * The [DAMON operation schemes](/Articles/863753/) (DAMOS) mechanism gives user space more control over memory-management operations (and page reclaim in particular). 
  * The tracing system now supports "user events", which are essentially dynamic tracepoints in user-space applications. The feature is described in [the merge changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/1bc191051dca) as: 

> User space can register an event with the kernel describing the format of the event. Then it will receive a byte in a page mapping that it can check against. A privileged task can then enable that event like any other event, which will change the mapped byte to true, telling the user space application to start writing the event to the tracing buffer. 

See the commits adding [documentation](https://git.kernel.org/linus/864ea0e10cc9) and [a sample program](https://git.kernel.org/linus/c57eb4781509) for more information. 




#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * The inline-encryption capabilities of block request queues can now be viewed in sysfs; see [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/20f01f163203) for details. 
  * Direct I/O is not normally a possibility for encrypted files, since the data must be buffered through the kernel for encryption or decryption anyway. If the hardware does the crypto work, though, the situation is different. In 5.18, files encrypted with fscrypt can be accessed with direct I/O if [inline encryption](/Articles/797309/) is in use. [This documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/cdaa1b1941f6) contains a little more information. 
  * The F2FS filesystem has gained support for [ID-mapped mounts](/Articles/837566/). 
  * Support for NFSv3 will always be built into the NFS server if NFS is enabled at all. This is done with the intent of making NFSv3 become the base, "always-supported" version of NFS in preparation for the eventual removal of NFSv2 support. 
  * There are two new `ioctl()` operations for Btrfs (`BTRFS_IOC_ENCODED_READ` and `BTRFS_IOC_ENCODED_WRITE`) that allow direct reading from and writing to a file's extents. The main use case for these commands is to support newer, more efficient send and receive operations. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Hardware monitoring** : ASUS ACPI embedded controllers, Vicor PLI1209BC digital power supervisors, Aquacomputer Farbwerk 360 RGB controllers, and Texas Instruments TMP464 and TMP468 temperature sensors. 
  * **Media** : Microchip CSI2 demux controllers, Hynix Hi-847 sensors, OmniVision OV08D10 and OG01A1B sensors, and Intersil ISL7998x video decoders. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Qualcomm MSM power manager controllers, Xilinx ZynqMP SHA3 accelerators, TI TPS6286x power regulators, Richtek RT5190A power-management ICs, Sunplus SP7021 SPI controllers, LiteX MMC host controllers, and Tesla full-self-driving clock controllers. 
  * **Sound** : Texas Instruments TAS5805M speaker amplifiers, AMD PCI audio coprocessors, and Awinic AW8738 audio amplifiers. 



#### Miscellaneous

  * New documentation of interest includes [some guidelines for researchers](/Articles/888891/) studying the kernel community, an [overview of the readahead code](https://git.kernel.org/linus/84dacdbd5352), [how to report regressions](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/admin-guide/reporting-regressions.rst), and [how developers should handle regressions](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/Documentation/process/handling-regressions.rst). 



#### Security-related

  * There is a new kernel keyring called `machine`; it contains the machine-owner keys implemented by the `shim` bootloader interface. Keys in the `machine` keyring can be trusted within the kernel and thus used to sign artifacts (such as modules or integrity data) used after the initial boot process. 
  * Support for asymmetric TPM-backed private keys has been removed. This feature, initially added for the 3.7 release, depends on an obsolete TPM version and had some security issues of its own; it is hoped that nobody is using it. 
  * The random-number generator has seen a lot of work. The differences between `/dev/random` and `/dev/urandom` [have been removed](/Articles/884875/) (though some of the `urandom` changes had to be reverted after [a regression was reported](/ml/linux-kernel/20220322155820.GA1745955@roeck-us.net/)). There is [a new mechanism](/Articles/887207/) for the avoidance of random-stream duplication when a virtual machine forks. The BLAKE2s algorithm is now used internally. There is more; see [the merge changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/5628b8de1228) and [this page](https://www.zx2c4.com/projects/linux-rng-5.17-5.18/) for lots more details. 
  * The kernel now provides saturating arithmetic helpers for `size_t` values; these can be used to harden code against integer-overflow bugs. See [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/e1be43d9b5d0) for more information. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The first big chunk of work from the [fast kernel-headers tree](/Articles/880175/) has found its way in with a significant [reorganization](https://git.kernel.org/linus/ccacfe56d7ec) of the scheduler header files. 
  * The block-layer congestion-tracking code, which [was found to be unused](/Articles/873672/) last year, has been removed. 
  * The memory-management code has been enhanced with [remote per-CPU page list draining](/Articles/884448/). 
  * More of the [folio patch series](/Articles/849538/) has been merged; this set converts internal memory-management functions (including the varieties of `get_user_pages()`) to folios and enables the creation of large folios in the readahead code. A second set converts [a set of `address_space_operations`](https://git.kernel.org/linus/6b1f86f8e9c7) to folios. 
  * The [`set_fs()` infrastructure](/Articles/832121/) has finally been fully removed. 



A quick check shows that linux-next currently contains nearly 9,000 commits that have not yet been pulled into the mainline, so it would seem that the 5.18 kernel will have a lot more to offer still. The merge window can be expected to remain open until April 3; tune in shortly after that for a summary of the remaining work pulled for this release.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/5.18](/Kernel/Index#Releases-5.18)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
