# What constitutes disclosure of a kernel vulnerability? [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 3, 2022 

Opinions differ on the best way to disclose security vulnerabilities, but there is a general consensus in our community that vulnerabilities should, indeed, be made public at some point. What happens between the discovery of a vulnerability and its disclosure can be more controversial. A recent discussion on the handling of kernel vulnerabilities has led to change in the policies of the linux-distros mailing list — all based on the question of what constitutes "disclosure". 

There are two mailing lists that are commonly used for the discussion of vulnerabilities in the Linux community; they are not limited to kernel problems. The first of these, [linux-distros](https://oss-security.openwall.org/wiki/mailing-lists/distros), is a closed list that is used to coordinate the response to non-public security bugs. The second, [oss-security](https://oss-security.openwall.org/wiki/mailing-lists/oss-security), is a public list which is used for, among other things, the public disclosure of vulnerabilities. Both are administered by Alexander "Solar Designer" Peslyak. 

There is a long list of policies that apply to postings on linux-distros, including one that requires the public disclosure of all vulnerabilities reported there within a relatively short period of time. That rule is there to ensure that companies don't sit on vulnerability reports indefinitely, no matter how embarrassing they are. Another list policy, though, says that vulnerabilities that are _already_ public have no place on linux-distros; all discussion of public vulnerabilities belongs on oss-security instead. The implementation of these policies has often proved to be tricky, especially when dealing with kernel vulnerabilities; see [this 2021 article](/Articles/874069/) for a recent example. 

In mid-May, Peslyak [wrote to oss-security](/ml/oss-security/20220515162740.GA20526@openwall.com/) in search of a solution for the ongoing mismatch between the list policies and how the kernel project does business. The core problem is how security problems are often handled in the kernel community: 

> For Linux kernel maintainers, it is customary to post a fix technically publicly but without indication of its security relevance, then work on getting it merged into the various trees, and expect that its security relevance wouldn't be clearly indicated publicly for a while. 

Such patches [tend to look like this](https://git.kernel.org/linus/690b2549b195) (though the exploitability of that particular bug has not been verified here). According to the linux-distros list policy, this public posting of a fix makes a particular vulnerability ineligible for discussion there — the vulnerability has already been disclosed. But distributors of the Linux kernel still often want a way to discuss the real problem, which has not been disclosed yet, under embargo and coordinate the shipping of the fix to their users. That cannot be done on oss-security, which is public, and it cannot be done on linux-distros because posting a patch is seen as having disclosed the vulnerability. 

Increasingly, Peslyak said, the linux-distros policy is simply being ignored when it comes to kernel vulnerabilities; he asked what should be done about that problem. One option, he said, would be to continue to look the other way when a vulnerability for which a public patch is available shows up on linux-distros. Alternatives would include strictly enforcing the policy (and thus forcing kernel vulnerabilities off the list entirely), changing the list policy, or even just shutting down the list entirely. 

As one might expect, a variety of opinions was expressed — though nobody seemed to be in favor of just killing the list. Jason Donenfeld [suggested](/ml/oss-security/YoJNtNJXUwLySmmO@zx2c4.com/) enforcing the policy, since kernel developers have little interest in anything but fixing the bug anyway. The dominant view, though, seemed to be in favor of adjusting the list's policies to better fit how the kernel project operates. As Donenfeld put it, kernel developers have little interest in the "security game" and are unlikely to start playing it, but Greg Kroah-Hartman [described another reason](/ml/oss-security/YoOMdbwp3D8bynKy@kroah.com/) for why the kernel project handles security fixes the way it does: 

> As you know, there are different "grades" of attackers. There's a huge range from "run metasploit that I just downloaded" to "look at this kernel change and figure out how to abuse the system that does not have it". By delaying a small bit of time from publicly posting a patch to telling the world that "hey, that was a security fix over there" that allows the community that works in the public added time for review and testing as our testing infrastructure that is NOT public is quite limited and reviews are limited given the huge range of needed developers to do that review. 
> 
> That delay can allow users to have the fix on their system first before the "metasploit" package is updated to attack it, which reduces the amount of vulnerable systems out there. Yes, it does not solve the "prevent readers of all commits" issue, but I don't know what we can really do about that except switch to a closed source development model, which isn't a good thing overall anyway. 

The review issue is not a small one. Security fixes are not immune from the ills that plague software development in general; they can easily introduce bugs (including security-related bugs) of their own, cause user-space regressions, and more. Like all other changes, they benefit from more review (and extensive testing) before being applied. There are limits to how much of that review and testing can happen without posting the patch in public. 

The benefits of obscuring the security problem motivating a specific patch may not be quite so clear. It may well reduce the number of casual attacks from the people often known as "script kiddies" but, as Kroah-Hartman pointed out, it does little to defend against capable attackers who are reading the commit stream for the purpose of finding vulnerabilities. Even so, it seems clear that there are developers and companies that see good reasons to keep security problems under wraps, at least for a short period. 

Given the perceived value of posting patches without explicitly disclosing the underlying security issue, Kroah-Hartman [said](/ml/oss-security/YoKiGWAX4E%2FmbGWB@kroah.com/), the best thing to do would be to amend the list policy to allow such posts. He suggested that other large projects might also benefit from such a policy. Peslyak [wasn't convinced](/ml/oss-security/20220522194644.GB21330@openwall.com/) that those projects, most of which do not use linux-distros at all, would be interested, but he did, in the end, [decide to amend the linux-distros policy](/ml/oss-security/20220524125804.GA29146@openwall.com/) to accommodate the kernel's way of doing things. Issues with a public fix are themselves considered public, the policy reads, except when they aren't: 

> There can be occasional exceptions to this, such as if the publicly accessible fix doesn't look like it's for a security issue and not revealing this publicly right away is somehow deemed desirable. In particular, we grant such exceptions to Linux kernel issues concurrently or very recently handled by the Linux kernel security team. 

Given the lack of subsequent discussion, it seems likely that this change is acceptable to the list members as a whole. Meanwhile, Vegard Nossum is working on [some changes to the kernel's documentation](/ml/linux-doc/20220531230309.9290-1-vegard.nossum%40oracle.com/) to make the policies for the reporting of security bugs more clear. None of this will definitively end the discussions around vulnerability reporting, disclosure, and mailing-list policies but, with luck, it will make things work a bit more smoothly than they do now.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Security issues](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Security_issues)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Vulnerabilities](/Kernel/Index#Security-Vulnerabilities)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
