# Finding bugs with sanitizers [LWN.net]

By **Jake Edge**  
September 27, 2022 

* * *

[LSS EU](/Archives/ConferenceByYear/#2022-Linux_Security_Summit_Europe)

Andrey Konovalov began his 2022 [Linux Security Summit Europe](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/linux-security-summit-europe/) (LSS EU) talk with a bold statement: "fuzzing is useless". As might be guessed, he qualified that assertion quickly by adding "without dynamic bug detectors". These bug detectors include "sanitizers" of various sorts, such as the [Kernel Address Sanitizer](https://google.github.io/kernel-sanitizers/KASAN) (KASAN), but there are others. Konovalov looked in detail at KASAN and gave an overview of the sanitizer landscape along with some ideas of ways to push these bug detectors further—to find even more kernel bugs. 

Fuzzers are great for exercising new paths in the code, but without having some kind of bug detector, they typically end up causing some kind of hard-to-debug kernel crash, he said. The sanitizers and other bug detectors turn those bugs into something that can be tracked down—and fixed. These [sanitizers](https://github.com/google/sanitizers) make up a family of bug-detection tools. They were originally created for user-space applications, but were ported to the kernel and had a "K" prepended to their acronym. The [AddressSanitizer](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/AddressSanitizer) (ASan) was not the first, but it became somewhat famous early on; others include the [MemorySanitizer](https://github.com/google/sanitizers/wiki/MemorySanitizer) (MSan) and [UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer.html) (UBSan). 

> **`$ sudo subscribe today`**
> 
> Subscribe today and elevate your LWN privileges. You’ll have access to all of LWN’s high-quality articles as soon as they’re published, and help support LWN in the process. [Act now](https://lwn.net/Promo/nst-sudo/claim) and you can start with a free trial subscription. 

There are a number of advantages that the sanitizers have, which have led to their popularity. They are easy to use; for user space it is just an extra compiler flag and for the kernel a build configuration option needs to be enabled. Compared to other tools that provide the same features, the sanitizers are fast as well. They are also precise since all of the bugs they report are true bugs and not false positives; occasionally a false positive does arise, but it is caused by a sanitizer bug that promptly gets fixed, he said. In addition, the sanitizers provide detailed reports on what caused a bug, which makes it much easier to track them down and fix them. 

#### KASAN

KASAN detects memory corruptions in the kernel; in particular, it finds out-of-bounds access, use-after-free bugs, and double (or invalid) free operations. It looks for those kinds of problems in various kernel memory regions: the slab allocators, page allocators, the vmalloc area, the stack, and global memory. It requires compiler support, but the feature has been available in both Clang and GCC for quite some time now, so that should not be any real barrier. The original mode of KASAN has been rebranded as "generic KASAN" because two other modes have been added over the years; he would be concentrating on generic KASAN in the talk, though he would briefly mention the other modes. 

[ ![\[Andrey Konovalov\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/2022/lsseu-konovalov-sm.png) ](/Articles/909622/)

There are two parts to KASAN, a compiler piece that is implemented in Clang and GCC, and run-time support, which is implemented in the kernel itself. The compiler module instruments the memory accesses in the kernel as it is being built; the module also adds red zones (regions of inaccessible, or poisoned, memory) for global variables and the stack. The run-time piece maintains the shadow memory that is used to track the state of the kernel memory; it also hooks into the kernel allocators to track allocations and free operations. Beyond that, it is responsible for detecting when bugs have happened and creating a report detailing them. 

Shadow memory uses one byte for every eight bytes of kernel memory in order to track the status of each of those regions. When looking at kernel memory, an aligned eight-byte chunk of memory can really only have nine different states with regard to whether a given byte is allowed to be accessed or not. The granularity of kernel allocations is such that some number of contiguous bytes at the beginning of that eight-byte region are accessible, followed by some number of inaccessible bytes; there is no situation where there will be a more than a single range of accessible bytes or one that does not start at the beginning of a region. 

That allows the state of the region to be encoded in just a few bits by using the number of accessible bytes in the region, though 0 is used to indicate that all bytes are accessible. So, 7 means that the first seven bytes are accessible, for example. Since there is a full byte used to encode the state, however, that allows for multiple values describing the memory that should not be accessed. The all-bytes-inaccessible case can then specify the type of memory it is (e.g. slab red zone, free page, invalid vmalloc memory, etc.) with a flag value outside of the 0-7 range. 

The shadow memory resides in a contiguous chunk of the address space with a known offset. The address of the shadow memory byte that corresponds to a given kernel address can easily be calculated by adding `addr >> 3` to the offset. 

The compiler instruments each memory access with a check of the corresponding location in shadow memory just before the access is performed. If the value of the shadow memory is non-zero for an eight-byte access, `kasan_report()` is called to indicate a problem. Similarly, accesses of less than eight bytes are checked to ensure that there are sufficient accessible bytes in the region; otherwise, the report function is called. 

The kernel is allocating and freeing memory constantly, so KASAN needs to ensure that the shadow memory is updated to reflect those changes. It does so by adding hooks to the various allocators in the kernel, which can be seen by looking for "`kasan_`" in the kernel source. Konovalov then went into the details of how KASAN works with the slab allocators. 

A slab is fully marked as inaccessible when it is initialized. Objects in the slab are then "unpoisoned" by marking them as accessible when they get allocated. KASAN maintains a poisoned red zone between each pair of allocated objects, which reduces the number of objects that can fit, but allows it to ensure the kernel is not accessing beyond the end of the objects. When objects are freed, they are poisoned as well. 

When objects are allocated with `kmalloc()`, they are allocated from a kmalloc cache that is generally larger than the requested size; if 100 bytes are allocated, they will be allocated from the kmalloc-128 cache, so there are 28 unused bytes. KASAN poisons those 28 bytes and also adds a poisoned red zone after the object. If the kernel calls [the `ksize()` function](/Articles/319686/) to gain access to the full length of the allocated object, KASAN will unpoison the piece at the end of the object, but, of course, the second red zone is still present to detect buffer overruns. 

KASAN wants to be able to detect use-after-free problems as well, but normally the kernel will reallocate an object immediately after it is freed. Since that will look like valid memory to KASAN, any access from a lingering reference will go undetected. So KASAN puts freed slab objects onto a quarantine list in order to delay their reuse. That increases the chances that KASAN will catch after-free accesses because the freed object will stay around for a while in a poisoned state. 

With the help of the compiler, KASAN is able to insert red zones into the kernel stack and global variables. For stack variables, the compiler can insert a red zone before and after the variable and generate code to poison the red zones and unpoison the variable itself. On the way out of the function, the red zones get unpoisoned since they are part of the stack frame that is about to be popped. A similar thing is done for global variables. The compiler turns a global variable into a structure with a red zone that gets poisoned via a constructor that the compiler adds. Those constructors get inserted into the main kernel binary and the module binaries as well. 

When KASAN detects a bug, it must create a report that is detailed enough to lead a kernel developer to the problem. In order to do so, KASAN keeps stack traces for allocations and frees in the stack depot, which was initially developed for KASAN but is now used by various subsystems in the kernel to store stack traces. Each stack trace is identified with a four-byte handle; since those need to be stored with the allocations they correspond to, the red zones are used for the allocation path, while the handles are normally stored in the freed objects for the freeing path. 

He showed an example of what KASAN reports when it detects a problem. He used a case from the KASAN test suite of an out-of-bounds access and the report showed the details of the access, where it occurred in the code, and a stack trace when the access occurred. Then it shows the stack trace of where the object was allocated; if there were a relevant stack trace for freeing the object, that would be shown as well. After that, KASAN tries to describe the type of memory that was affected and the contents of the shadow memory surrounding the problem access. 

Some parts of the kernel are not covered by KASAN, including the assembly and early boot code. The instrumentation that is added by the compiler is normally done as inline functions, but there is a setting to change that so that regular function calls are used. That will run more slowly, but it creates a smaller kernel image, which may be useful in constrained environments. 

Beyond the generic mode that he had just described, which is supported by multiple architectures, KASAN has two other modes that work with arm64 memory tagging; he described them further later in the talk. KASAN has two test suites, [one](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.19/source/lib/test_kasan.c) that uses the [KUnit unit-testing framework](/Articles/780985/) and [another](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.19/source/lib/test_kasan_module.c) that does not; all of the tests in the latter, except for one that has a user-space component to test `copy_from_user()`/`copy_to_user()`, are being moved into the KUnit suite. Unlike other parts of the kernel, KASAN uses [Bugzilla](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/buglist.cgi?component=Sanitizers&product=Memory%20Management&resolution=---) for its bugs; checking that will show lots of areas that still need improvement in the tool, Konovalov said. 

KASAN is "relatively fast"; the slowdown is on the order of 2x when it is running, he said, and perhaps 3x when running in non-inline mode. It has a fairly substantial memory penalty though; it needs 1/8 of memory for the shadow memory, 1/32 of memory for the quarantine, and the slab red zones increase those allocations by around 1.5x. Once KASAN is enabled, any kind of testing or fuzzing can then be run on the kernel; whatever KASAN finds will be reported to the kernel log. 

#### More sanitizers

KASAN detects most of the memory corruption problems that can occur, but there are other sanitizers available to detect other kinds of problems. For example, the [Kernel Memory Sanitizer](https://google.github.io/kernel-sanitizers/KMSAN) (KMSAN) detects the use of uninitialized memory in the kernel; it can also detect information leaks of uninitialized memory across security boundaries such as to user space or a device. Like KASAN, KMSAN uses compiler instrumentation and shadow memory, though it tracks the initialization state of the memory rather that its accessibility. KMSAN is not in the mainline, but Konovalov hopes that it will be merged soon. 

Data races are [detected](/Articles/877200/) with the [Kernel Concurrency Sanitizer](https://google.github.io/kernel-sanitizers/KCSAN) (KCSAN). As with the others, it uses compiler instrumentation; in this case, it installs "soft" watchpoints on data accesses. The access is stalled for a bit of time and the values at the location before and after are compared to see if concurrent access is happening. That's a simplification of how it is implemented, he said, but gives the general flavor of it. 

Finally, there is the [Undefined Behavior Sanitizer](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/dev-tools/ubsan.html) (UBSAN), which really needs a "K" before its acronym, he said. It uses compiler instrumentation to test for various kinds of code that use undefined behavior. For example, if an eight-byte value is shifted by 64 bits, the result is undefined so UBSAN would flag it. 

Normally, sanitizers are run with test or fuzzing workloads, but it would be nice to have some that can be run on production workloads to see what kind of bugs can be found there. That kind of testing might be on actual production systems or might be on beta or "dog food" systems with real workloads. There are some tools that can be used for that kind of testing, he said. 

The first is [Kernel Electric-Fence](https://google.github.io/kernel-sanitizers/KFENCE) (KFENCE), which is a memory-corruption detector that only works on slab memory. It uses a probabilistic approach by sampling some allocations, which get placed next to a protected guard page to detect overruns. Because it only affects a subset of the allocations, its impact is lower, so it can be run in more real-world deployments. Running it across a fleet of systems makes it that much more likely to find bugs. 

The KASAN [mode based on software tags](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/dev-tools/kasan.html#software-tag-based-kasan), which uses memory tags instead of shadow memory to track memory status, is another possibility. Its performance is similar to that of KASAN, so it probably is not suitable for production, but its memory use is much reduced compared to KASAN. Since it is only available for arm64 systems, it would make sense for fuzzing on Android systems, for example. It also paves the way for the KASAN [hardware-tag mode](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/dev-tools/kasan.html#hardware-tag-based-kasan). 

There is also the idea of using sanitizers as a way to mitigate various flaws; since they can detect these kinds of problems, they can either panic the system, which is safer from a security and robustness standpoint, or perhaps mitigate the problematic access and allow the kernel to continue running. There are, as yet, no CPUs that support the Arm Memory Tagging Extension (MTE) that the KASAN hardware-tag mode uses, but there are plans for them. It would move the memory-validity check for KASAN into the CPU directly, so it would be fast, Konovalov said, which might mean that it could be used directly on production systems. The RAM impact will be greatly reduced as well. 

But, since there are no CPUs available, the performance penalty is not yet known, though it is expected to be around 10% in the more accurate MTE sync mode; for async mode, the penalty is expected to be near zero. It remains to be seen if people will be willing to take a 10% hit in production to catch these kinds of errors. He recommended his talk from LSS NA last year ([video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UwMt0e_dC_Q), [slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1IpICtHR1T3oHka858cx1dSNRu2XcT79-RCRPgzCuiRk/edit?usp=sharing)) for those who are interested in finding out more about using hardware-tag KASAN mode for mitigating memory corruptions. 

#### Extending

If you take a standard fuzzer and run it on the kernel, you are probably going to find the same bugs that everyone else is finding, he said. The same goes for the stock bug-finding tools; the same bugs are being found over and over again using them. So extending these tools, and changing the workloads that are being run on the kernels, is a path toward finding novel kernel bugs. 

KASAN and KMSAN can be seen as more than just sanitizers, they provide frameworks for tracking memory in various states and detecting when memory is being used in an unexpected state. So those tools could be extended in various ways to catch other kinds of problems. 

For example, the kernel's structure representing a packet ([`struct sk_buff`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v5.19/source/include/linux/skbuff.h#L851)) has a `skb_shared_info` field placed at the end of the structure. KASAN cannot detect overflows into `skb_shared_info` because it is all part of a single object. One possible extension to KASAN would be to place a small red zone before `skb_shared_info`, which would require some work to ensure that the red zone was unpoisoned when the socket buffer is (correctly) being accessed in full. This kind of "intra-object overflow" is not being detected at all, but could be added for various kernel data structures. The socket buffer overflow is not just a theoretical problem, as he used it in an [exploit](https://github.com/xairy/kernel-exploits/tree/master/CVE-2017-1000112) for [CVE-2017-1000112](https://xairy.io/articles/cve-2017-1000112), which he found in the Linux UDP stack. 

Another area to look into would be adding other kernel allocators to the checking that KASAN does. Right now, it does no checking of the per-CPU allocator, but the allocator is used in many places in the kernel and especially in the networking subsystem. He showed two KASAN test cases that demonstrate the lack of any checking for out-of-bounds accesses or use after free on memory allocated that way. Similarly, other kernel allocators could be targeted, perhaps including some of the specialized Android allocators. 

His final example has already been implemented. A few years back, he was working on fuzzing the kernel's USB stack from the point of view of an external device and needed to extend KMSAN to detect information leaks to USB devices. A malicious device needs some way to get information out of the kernel in order to determine kernel addresses, so he was interested in finding uninitialized kernel memory being copied to these devices. Once he added that detection, syzbot starting finding quite a few of those kinds of flaws. 

In conclusion, Konovalov said that there are two paths toward finding more kernel bugs: improving the fuzzers or improving the bug detectors. It is probably easier to improve the fuzzers at this point, but lots of people are already working on that, while few are improving the bug-detection side. Beyond just improving the existing detectors, there are opportunities to create completely new ones that look for whole new classes of bugs, such as type confusions or missing TLB flushes. There are lots of areas open to experimentation on ways to find more kernel bugs. 

[I would like to thank LWN subscribers for supporting my travel to Dublin for the Linux Security Summit Europe.]  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development tools](/Kernel/Index#Development_tools)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [KASan](/Kernel/Index#KASan)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel/Tools](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel-Tools)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Linux Security Summit Europe/2022](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Linux_Security_Summit_Europe-2022)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
