# The first half of the 6.5 merge window [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
June 30, 2023 

The first days of the 6.5 merge window have been a bit calmer than usual, with "only" 4,000 non-merge changesets having been pulled into the mainline repository. Those changesets include a fair amount of significant work, though. Read on for LWN's summary of the first set of changes merged for the next major kernel release.   


#### Architecture-specific

  * X86 systems can now parallelize much of the process of bringing up all of the CPUs, reducing the time to get all processors online by as much as a factor of ten. 
  * Intel's "Topology Aware Register and PM Capsule Interface" (abbreviated "TPMI") is now supported. This is an interface that provides a better way of managing power-management features. 
  * The [arm64 permission-indirection extension](/Articles/925757/) is now supported. There is no new functionality resulting from this support now, but it is needed for some upcoming features. 



#### Core kernel

  * The io_uring subsystem has gained the ability to store the rings and submission queue in user-space memory, rather than having the kernel allocate that memory. This allows user space to allocate the needed memory as huge pages, hopefully improving performance. [This changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/03d89a2de25b) has a little more information. 
  * The kernel's Rust support has been upgraded to the Rust 1.68.2 release, the first such upgrade since that support was merged. Other than that, the changes to Rust support were relatively minor this time around; [this merge message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a1257b5e3b7f) has the details. 
  * The kernel has [gained support for unaccepted memory](/Articles/928328/) — the protocol by which secure guest systems accept memory allocated by the host. The merged code includes the (somewhat) controversial protocol to automatically accept all provided memory in the firmware when running a guest kernel without support for memory acceptance. 
  * The BPF subsystem has gained the ability to attach filter functions to [kfuncs](/Articles/856005/); the filter can limit the contexts from which the kfunc can be invoked. The initial use is to restrict callers of [`bpf_sock_destroy()`](https://git.kernel.org/linus/4ddbcb886268) to programs of the `BPF_TRACE_ITER` type. 
  * Pinning of BPF objects can now be done using `O_PATH` file descriptors as an alternative to providing the path name for the target directory. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * It is now possible to mount a filesystem underneath an existing mount on the same mount point; this feature is useful for the provision of seamless updates within containers. See [this article](/Articles/927491/), [this article](/Articles/934094/), and [the merge message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/c0a572d9d32f) for details. 
  * The new `cachestat()` system call can query the page-cache state of files and directories, allowing user space to determine which of its file pages are currently in RAM. See [this article](/Articles/917096/) for details and [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/cf264e1329fb) for a man page. 



#### Hardware support

  * **Miscellaneous** : Renesas RZ/V2M clocked serial interfaces. 
  * **Networking** : Fintek F81604 USB to 2CAN interfaces, Microchip LAN865x Rev.B0 10BASE-T1S Internal PHYs, Realtek RTL8192FU interfaces, Realtek 8723DS SDIO wireless network adapters, Realtek 8851BE PCI wireless network adapters, and MediaTek SoC Ethernet PHYs. 
  * **Regulator** : TI TPS6287x power regulators, TI TPS6594 power-management chips, Rockchip RK806 power-management chips, and Renesas RAA215300 power-management ICs. 



#### Miscellaneous

  * The [nolibc library](/Articles/920158/) has gained stack protector support, a number of architecture-specific improvements, and more. 



#### Networking

  * The passing of process credentials, as done with the `SCM_CREDENTIALS` control message, has been enhanced with a new `SCM_PIDFD` type. As might be expected from the name, this message passes a [pidfd](/Articles/794707/) rather than a process ID. There is also a new `SO_PEERPIDFD` option to `[getsockopt()](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/setsockopt.2.html)` that obtains the pidfd of the peer process. 



#### Security-related

  * The "secretmem" facility, in the form of the [`memfd_secret()` system call](/Articles/865256/), is now enabled by default. This change was made after [some research](/Articles/931406/) determined that secretmem use does not hurt performance as had been thought. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The workqueue subsystem will now automatically detect CPU-intensive work items (defined as running for at least 10ms by default) and mark them. This will prevent such items from blocking the execution of other work items. There is a new configuration debugging option to enable the reporting of CPU-intensive work items detected in this way. 
  * The kernel is now built with the `-fstrict-flex-arrays=3` compiler option, adding more warnings around the use of flexible arrays. See [this article](/Articles/908817/) for more details on this work. 
  * The new attribute macro `__counted_by()` can be used to document which field in a structure contains the number of elements stored in a flexible array (in the same structure). The documentation is useful, but it can also eventually be used for bounds checks as well. 



The 6.5 merge window can be expected to remain open until July 9. LWN will be back shortly after that with a summary of the changes pulled in the second half; stay tuned.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/6.5](/Kernel/Index#Releases-6.5)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
