# Making life (even) harder for proprietary modules [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 3, 2023 

The kernel community has never had a smooth relationship with the purveyors of proprietary kernel modules. Developers tend to strongly dislike those modules, which cannot be debugged or fixed by anybody other than their creator, and many see them as a violation of the kernel's license and their copyrights on the code. Nonetheless, proprietary modules are tolerated, within bounds. A recent patch from Christoph Hellwig suggests that those bounds are about to be tightened slightly, in a somewhat surprising way. 

Back in 2006, there was [a brief effort](/Articles/215075/) to ban the loading of proprietary kernel modules altogether. That attempt was [shut down](/Articles/214149/) by Linus Torvalds for a number of reasons, starting with the fact that simply loading a proprietary module into the Linux kernel is, on its own, not a copyright violation; it is something that any Linux user is allowed to do. Trying to ban such modules, Torvalds said, would be an indication that the development community is more interested in arguing about licenses than in improving the technology. 

_Distributing_ a proprietary module might be a copyright violation, though, if the module itself is a derived work of the kernel code. But "derived work" is a fuzzy concept, and the kernel itself cannot really make that judgment. There is a longstanding mechanism in the kernel designed to keep infringing modules out, though: GPL-only exports. A kernel module cannot do anything useful without accessing symbols (functions and data structures) exported to it by the kernel. Many of those symbols are restricted to modules that have declared a GPL-compatible license, thus fencing proprietary modules away from a lot of kernel functionality. 

In theory, the GPL-only marking indicates that a symbol is so deeply tied into the kernel that any code making use of it must necessarily be a derived work of the kernel. In practice, the developers making those decisions do not carry out an analysis to determine whether that is the case — and they are not usually qualified to do such an analysis anyway. Instead, symbols are routinely marked GPL-only as a way of making life harder for proprietary modules in general. 

To the surprise of, well, almost nobody, the creators of proprietary modules have long sought ways around the limitations imposed by GPL-only exports. This has included falsely declaring a GPL-compatible license, but doing so is such an overt admission of guilt that companies instinctively avoid it. Instead, they look for more subtle ways to get the access they need. One scheme was inadvertently [revealed](/Articles/827596/) in 2020 as part of a larger patch set intended to make a form of peer-to-peer DMA work. If a module declares itself to have a GPL-compatible license, it will have full access to all of the symbols exported by the kernel. If that module then imports symbols from a proprietary module, it can serve as a go-between, making the full kernel available to the proprietary code. This is a variant of the often-used "GPL condom" approach. 

At that time, [Hellwig merged a patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/262e6ae7081d) intended to make that method more difficult. In current kernels, any module that uses symbols from a proprietary module is treated as being proprietary itself; it immediately loses its ability to access GPL-only symbols. If the module has already gained access to any GPL-only symbols, any attempt it makes to import symbols from a proprietary module will fail. This check breaks the ability of a module to serve as a go-between, sending proprietary-module vendors scurrying back to their lairs complaining about how they have been foiled again. 

There is always another way, though, it seems. The kernel provides a macro called [`symbol_get()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.4.7/source/include/linux/module.h#L303), which turns around and calls [`__symbol_get()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.4.7/source/kernel/module/main.c#L1296) to do the real work, which happens to be looking up the address associated with a kernel symbol. This function, which has been in the kernel since the 2.5.48 release in 2002 (where it was added as a part of the wholesale replacement of the module loader), has a specific limitation, though: it only looks up symbols provided by loadable modules. It is intended for use with tightly linked modules that need to reference each other in situations where one of the modules may not be loaded, and without creating reference loops. By appearances, it cannot be used to find the location of GPL-only kernel symbols, and would seem to be of little use for proprietary-module vendors trying to bend the rules. 

What `symbol_get()` _can_ be used for, though, is obtaining addresses from a proprietary module without going through the normal import mechanism (and its restrictions). It can, in other words, be used to circumvent the 2020 fix, making it once again possible for a nominally GPL-licensed module to call into a proprietary module and give that module access to the kernel functionality it needs. Hellwig has [asserted](/ml/linux-kernel/20230731083806.453036-6-hch@lst.de/) that NVIDIA, a company long known for its proprietary kernel modules, has duly modified its code to make use of this workaround. 

In response, he posted [this patch set](/ml/linux-kernel/20230731083806.453036-1-hch@lst.de/) (since [revised](/ml/linux-kernel/20230801173544.1929519-1-hch@lst.de/)) to close the hole once again. It changes the behavior of `symbol_get()`, causing it to fail when asked to look up a symbol that is _not_ marked GPL-only. This is an inversion of the usual test, which denies access to symbols that _are_ marked GPL-only. The reasoning is that `symbol_get()` has always been intended for low-level cooperation deep within the kernel, where everything is expected to be GPL-only anyway. As it happens, a handful of the uses in the kernel were for symbols that were not so marked, so the patch set includes changes to make the symbols referenced in those cases GPL-only. 

The `symbol_get()` change also, coincidentally, makes it impossible for a GPL-licensed kernel module to resolve symbols defined inside a proprietary module using `symbol_get()`. Once this change finds its way into a mainline release and, from there, into distributions, the developers of proprietary modules will have to find another way to gain access to the kernel internals they need. The change has been [applied](/ml/linux-kernel/ZMqeJT9Fv0zzw3%2Fv@bombadil.infradead.org/) by module maintainer Luis Chamberlain, so the chances of it going into the mainline eventually seem fairly good. 

Given how long this conflict has been simmering, there is little doubt that authors of proprietary modules will find another way to bypass the intent of the kernel community. Proprietary or not, modules are running within the kernel's address space, so the attack surface available to any module attempting to circumvent the kernel's symbol-access policies is large and can probably never be properly secured. The best that can be done is to continue to make life uncomfortable for those who would ship binary-only kernel modules in the hope that they eventually take the hint and create a freely licensed solution. It is not a perfect technique, but it has often worked over the years.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Copyright issues](/Kernel/Index#Copyright_issues)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Modules/Exported symbols](/Kernel/Index#Modules-Exported_symbols)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/6.6](/Kernel/Index#Releases-6.6)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
