# Following up on file-position locking [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 11, 2023 

LWN recently covered [a discussion on file-position locking](/Articles/939389/) that demonstrated the hazards that can result from unexpected concurrency. It turns out that this discussion had not yet fully run its course. Since that article was written, additional changes intended to address a performance regression evolved into a core virtual filesystem (VFS) layer API change to carry out some much-delayed housecleaning. 

At the end of the previous article, [a change](https://git.kernel.org/linus/20ea1e7d13c1) had been merged into the mainline to unconditionally take the file-position lock (which ensures that only one thread is manipulating the current file read/write position at any given time). The article noted that the performance impact of this change had not been measured. That changed on August 3, when Mateusz Guzik [reported](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20230803095311.ijpvhx3fyrbkasul@f/) that there was indeed a performance change — specifically, a 5% regression on a test he had run. VFS layer maintainer Christian Brauner initially [discounted](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20230803-segeln-hemmen-34df115b4914@brauner/) the report, but also said that the problem, if it truly existed, could be mitigated by only taking the position lock for directories (and not for regular files). The original locking problem had only affected directory reads, so the fix is only needed there as well. 

Linus Torvalds was quick to respond to the report, though, [posting a patch](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=whQ51+rKrnUYeuw3EgJMv2RJrwd7UO9qCgOkUdJzcirWw@mail.gmail.com/) that implemented the directory-only behavior; it worked by doing the locking explicitly in the implementation of the directory-related system calls. Brauner [pointed out](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20230803-libellen-klebrig-0a9e19dfa7dd@brauner/) that this approach missed the case of calling [`lseek()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/lseek.2.html) on a directory; ""that's the heinous part"". Since the whole purpose of `lseek()` is to manipulate the file position, that was indeed a bit of an oversight. 

Torvalds [acknowledged the omission](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=wi97khTatMKCvJD4tBkf6rMKTP=fLQDnok7MGEEewSz9g@mail.gmail.com/), but additionally realized that there are some filesystems that support `read()` and `write()` on directories as well. ""They may be broken, but people actually did do things like that historically, maybe there's a reason adfs and ceph allow it"". Those cases, too, would need to be addressed for a complete fix. To create that fix, he put together a new patch that changes `__fdget_pos()` to simply test whether the object in question is a directory, and to always take the lock in that case. Brauner was still [unconvinced](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20230804-turnverein-misswirtschaft-ef07a4d7bbec@brauner/) about the need for the patch, but agreed that Torvalds's approach would work; that patch was [duly applied](https://git.kernel.org/linus/797964253d35) to the mainline for 6.5-rc5. 

After that happened, Brauner [suggested](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20230805-furor-angekauft-82e334fc83a3@brauner/) a slightly different approach. `__fdget_pos()` takes a `file` structure pointer as an argument; to determine whether that `file` corresponds to an open directory, the code must traverse the `f_inode` pointer to get to the associated `inode` structure. A simpler test, he said, might be to test whether the given `file` provides either of the `iterate()` or `iterate_shared()` operations, which are only provided for directories. 

Once upon a time, the kernel's `file_operations` structure included a member called `readdir()` that, as might be expected, would be provided by filesystems to support reading directory contents. The 3.11 release in 2013 saw that member renamed to `iterate()`, with a different API. This function had exclusive access to the inode, which would be write-locked before the call was made. That limited performance for filesystems that were able to support multiple, concurrent read operations on the same directory. To speed things up, a new `iterate_shared()` variant was [added for the 4.7 release](https://git.kernel.org/linus/6192269444eb) in 2016. This version is called with a shared (read) lock on the inode, so multiple calls can be running concurrently. 

At the time, the documentation was updated with the admonition: ""Old method is only used if the new one is absent; eventually it will be removed. Switch while you still can; the old one won't stay."" Few people who are familiar with the kernel development process will be shocked to learn that, in fact, `iterate()` _did_ stay, and that it is still present in current kernels, seven years later. 

Torvalds, having been "[shamed](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=witxS+hfdFc+xJVpb9y-cE6vYopkDaZvvk=aXHcv-P5=w@mail.gmail.com/)" by this reminder that `iterate()` still exists, decided to finish the job. With [a new patch set](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=wiEzoh1gqfOp3DNTS9iPOxAWtS71qS0xv1XBziqGHGTwg@mail.gmail.com/), he eliminated the `iterate()` function. For the filesystems that were still using it (ceph, coda, exfat, jfs, ntfs, ocfs2, overlayfs, procfs, and vboxfs), he created a new wrapper that can be provided as `iterate_shared()`; it drops the read lock, then acquires a full write lock before calling into the filesystem. The exclusive locking, in other words, has been pushed down a level and only appears in the few remaining places where it is needed. 

Torvalds had [intended](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=whJtLkYwEFTS9LcRiMjSqq_xswDeXo7hYNWT0Em6nL4Sw@mail.gmail.com/) to apply this change during the 6.6 merge window; it is, after all, rather late in the 6.5 cycle for core changes of this nature. One of the advantages of being Linus Torvalds, though, is that you can break the rules when it seems appropriate; he took that approach in this case and [merged the change](https://git.kernel.org/linus/3e3271549670) into the mainline, also for the 6.5-rc5 release; it was quickly followed by [a change from Brauner](https://git.kernel.org/linus/7d84d1b9af63) to change the position-locking test to just look for the existence of an `iterate_shared()` function. 

Naturally, none of that work updated the associated documentation, giving the tireless documentation maintainer [something to do](/ml/linux-doc/874jl945bv.fsf@meer.lwn.net/). Otherwise, though, perhaps this little story has finally come to a real conclusion, with code that is more correct and a little bit of longstanding technical debt removed. Of course, it is once again true that no performance results have been posted, so the possibility of a third installment cannot be entirely ruled out.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems/Virtual filesystem layer](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems-Virtual_filesystem_layer)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
