# The first half of the 6.6 merge window [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
August 31, 2023 

As of this writing, 4,588 non-merge changesets have been pulled into the mainline repository for the 6.6 kernel release. The 6.6 merge window, in other words, is just getting started. Nonetheless, a fair amount of significant work has already been pulled, so the time has come to summarize what has happened so far in this development cycle.   


Interesting changes pulled for 6.6, to date, include: 

#### Architecture-specific

  * The PA-RISC architecture has gained a just-in-time BPF compiler. 



#### Core kernel

  * The `/sys/devices/system/cpu/smt/control` knob has, until now, only been able to accept two values: `on` to turn simultaneous multithreading ("hyperthreading") on, or `off` to disable it. This knob has been enhanced to also accept a numeric value indicating the number of threads that should be enabled per core. Initially this feature will be used by the PowerPC architecture, which can (in some CPUs) run up to 16 threads in each core. 
  * The [earliest eligible virtual deadline first (EEVDF) CPU scheduler](/Articles/925371/) has been merged; it should provide better performance and fairness while relying less on fragile heuristics. The [merge message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/3ca9a836ff53) notes that there may be some rare performance regressions with some workloads, and that work is ongoing to resolve them. 



#### Filesystems and block I/O

  * There is a new flag, `FSCONFIG_CMD_CREATE_EXCL`, for the mount API; if it is present, it prevents a mount from sharing an in-kernel superblock with another mount. As explained in [this commit](https://git.kernel.org/linus/22ed7ecdaefe), superblock sharing can result in mount options being ignored, which can lead to security problems. The intent is to enable the addition of a new `--exclusive` flag to the `mount` command so that administrators can request that superblock sharing not be allowed. 
  * The virtual filesystem layer now supports fine-grained timestamps on files. As described in [this article](/Articles/937247/), these timestamps allow filesystems like NFS to detect changes quickly for correct cache management while minimizing the overhead of maintaining timestamps in general. Currently fine-grained timestamps are supported by the Btrfs, ext4, tmpfs, and XFS filesystems. 
  * The tmpfs filesystem has gained a number of features, including quota support, user extended attributes, direct I/O, and stable directory offsets (fixing a problem with filesystems exported via NFS). 
  * The kernel will no longer allow the changing of permissions on symbolic links. 
  * The [`fchmodat2()` system call](/Articles/939217/) has been added. This version supports the `flags` argument that is defined as part of [`fchmodat()`](https://linux.die.net/man/2/fchmodat), but which has never been supported by Linux. This new system call will enable the removal of some inelegant hacks that were needed by C libraries to implement the missing functionality. [This merge message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/475d4df82719) describes the currently supported flags. 
  * The erofs filesystem has gained a bloom filter that speeds up negative extended-attribute lookups and support for the [Deflate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deflate) compression algorithm. 
  * The XFS filesystem has gained the ability to use large folios in the page cache and some associated optimizations, all of which should improve performance significantly for some workloads. 
  * It is now possible to [build a kernel without buffer-head support](/Articles/930173/), though doing so greatly restricts the filesystems that are available. This is part of the [ongoing effort](/Articles/931809/) to get rid of — or at least greatly reduce — the use of buffer heads in the kernel. 
  * The [ublk](/Articles/903855/) user-space block driver has gained (undocumented) support for zoned-storage devices. 



#### Hardware support

  * **GPIO and pin control** : ADI DS4520 I2C-based GPIO expanders. 
  * **Hardware monitoring** : Renesas HS3001 humidity and temperature sensors. 
  * **Miscellaneous** : Loongson SPI controllers and Cirrus Logic CS42L43 SPI controllers. 
  * **Networking** : Broadcom ASP 2.0 Ethernet controllers, Marvell 88Q2XXX PHYs, and TI PRU ICSS Industrial Ethernet peripherals. 
  * **Regulator** : Qualcomm REFGEN voltage regulators, ADI MAX77857/MAX77831 regulators, Richtek RTQ2208 SubPMIC regulators, and Awinic AW37503 dual output power regulators. 



#### Miscellaneous

  * The kernel has moved forward to Rust 1.71.1 and bindgen 0.65.1. There have been a number of changes to low-level utilities; see [this merge message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a031fe8d1d32) for the details. 



#### Networking

  * The [AF_XDP](/Articles/750845/) address family has gained the ability to deal with packets stored in multiple buffers; [this changelog](https://git.kernel.org/linus/3226e3139dfe) and [this documentation patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/49ca37d0d825) have a fair amount of detail on how it works. 
  * There is a new BPF hook into packet defragmentation that makes it easier to see (and filter) complete packets; [this merge message](https://git.kernel.org/linus/eb03993a6078) has a little more information. 
  * A new BPF hook (`update_socket_protocol`) allows a BPF program to change the requested protocol for a new socket. Its primary purpose seems to be to transparently cause programs requesting TCP connections to use [multipath TCP](/Articles/544399/) instead. MPTCP has also gained some initial support for BPF programs that route packets to different subflows. 
  * The [io_uring subsystem](/Articles/776703/) has gained partial support for network operations, though the full set will wait until the 6.7 cycle. 



#### Security-related

  * The [`seccomp()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/seccomp.2.html) system call has gained a new flag (`SECCOMP_USER_NOTIF_FD_SYNC_WAKE_UP`) that indicates that events from the watched process will be handled synchronously; that allows the kernel to schedule the two processes more efficiently. 
  * The [`kmalloc()` randomness patches](/Articles/938637/) have been merged. This work adds a bit of entropy to memory allocations, making exploits a bit harder. 
  * The SELinux subsystem, formerly "NSA SELinux", has [been "de-branded"](https://git.kernel.org/linus/90aa4f5e92f2). ""While NSA was the original primary developer and continues to help maintain SELinux, SELinux has long since transitioned to a wide community of developers and maintainers"". 



#### Virtualization and containers

  * The [`userfaultfd()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/userfaultfd.2.html) system call has gained a new operation, `UFFDIO_POISON`, that can mark pages as being poisoned. The use case here is in virtual-machine migration; if a memory page has been corrupted (and thus "poisoned") on the old system, `userfaultfd()` can be used to retain that marking on the new system. 



#### Internal kernel changes

  * The "kunit" unit-testing framework can now run the [Rust documentation tests](https://git.kernel.org/linus/a66d733da801) along with the rest. 
  * The [Frontswap](/Articles/386090/) mechanism was added to the kernel in 2010. In 2023, it's removal is [now complete](https://git.kernel.org/linus/42c06a0e8ebe). 
  * The [`struct ptdesc` patches](/Articles/937839/) have been merged. They take the page-table-related fields of `struct page` and split them into a separate structure, continuing the process of separating the various uses of `struct page`. 
  * A [change to internal symbol handling](/Articles/939842/) was merged to make it harder for proprietary modules to bypass restrictions on GPL-only symbols. 
  * The [dynamic software I/O TLB patch series](/Articles/940973/) has been merged, providing better support for devices that, for one reason or another, need to use bounce buffering. 



The 6.6 merge window can be expected to remain open through September 10, after which the development community will spend seven or eight weeks stabilizing all of this work. As always, LWN will catch up with the rest of the merge window once it closes.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/6.6](/Kernel/Index#Releases-6.6)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
