# The 2004 Kernel Summit [LWN.net]

The 2004 Kernel Summit was scheduled for July 19 and 20, immediately prior to the Ottawa Linux Symposium. For those who are interested, [the advance agenda](http://lwn.net/Articles/93586/) is available. LWN editor Jonathan Corbet was a member of the program committee and attended the event; the following is his report. 

[![\[mini group photo\]](https://static.lwn.net/images/ns/ks2004-group-sm.jpg)](/Articles/94383/)

### Monday

Monday got off to a bit of a slow start; it seems that some of the developers may have enjoyed themselves a bit too much at the opening dinner the night before. Summit attendees also had a serious problem: ISP troubles keep the wireless network down all day, so there was little alternative to actually listening to the ongoing sessions. That said, a constructive set of discussions was held with little overt disagreement among the participants. 

Monday's sessions include: 

  * [The processor panel](/Articles/94194/). Engineers from Intel, AMD, and IBM discussed where their architectures are going and the implications for the Linux kernel. 

  * [Virtual memory](/Articles/94195/), with special attention to the topics of NUMA support, hotpluggable memory, and page clustering. 

  * [Software suspend](/Articles/94197/); what will it take before we can reliably suspend and restore our systems? 

  * [Kobjects and sysfs](/Articles/94198/), and what needs to be done to get the developers to complain about them less in 2.7. 

  * [Video drivers](/Articles/94202/), featuring a cameo appearance by Keith Packard. 

  * [Desktop performance](/Articles/94203/). Robert Love led a discussion on how the Linux kernel can better support desktop applications. 

  * [Short topics](/Articles/94205/), being an opportunity for developers to present an interesting issue in five minutes. 




### Tuesday

Tuesday's coverage is now complete. This long day was set aside for a wide range of topics, from customer experiences to clustering, to the development process. The individual sessions were: 

  * [The customer panel](/Articles/94384/) was a discussion led by technical managers from Goldman Sachs and Amazon.com; they talked about the problems they have with Linux and how the kernel could better support their needs. 

  * [Clustered storage](/Articles/94559/) and just what capabilities need to go into the kernel to support this feature. 

  * [Kexec and fast booting](/Articles/94560/); what is required to make the Linux kernel boot in a reasonable period of time? 

  * [RAS tools](/Articles/94561/), with an emphasis on simple tools to help track down kernel reliability problems. 

  * [Networking summit summary](/Articles/94565/). One week prior to the kernel summit, a small group got together in Oregon for a two-day networking summit. Stephen Hemminger summarized the results for the kernel group. 

  * [Asynchronous I/O](/Articles/94566/); a session on what is required to make AIO work properly under Linux, and whether it is worth doing. 

  * [Multipath I/O](/Articles/94569/) and device mapper issues. 

  * [Virtualization](/Articles/94571/), running virtual machines under (and on top of) Linux. 

  * [Security](/Articles/94572/). Linux has acquired a great many security features over the last few years; what other work is required in that area? 

  * [Class-based Kernel Resource Management](/Articles/94573/). 

  * [OSDL relations](/Articles/94574/). How does the Open Source Development Labs relate with the development community, and how can that relationship be improved? 

  * The [final session](/Articles/94386/) was about the development process; have a look to see what was said about when the 2.7 development series will begin - the answer is not quite what one would expect. 


  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Kernel Summit](/Kernel/Index#Kernel_Summit)  
[Conference](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/)| [Kernel Summit/2004](/Archives/ConferenceIndex/#Kernel_Summit-2004)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
