# Reducing patch postings to linux-kernel [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jake Edge**  
November 8, 2023 

The linux-kernel mailing list famously gets an enormous amount of email on a daily basis; the volume is so high that various email providers try to rate-limit it, which can lead to huge backlogs on the sending side and, of course, delayed mail. Part of the reason there is so much traffic is that nearly every patch gets copied to the mailing list, even when it may be unnecessary to do so. A proposed change would start shunting some of that patch email aside and, as might be guessed, has both supporters and detractors, but the discussion does highlight some of the different ways the mailing list is used by kernel developers. 

In a [post](/ml/ksummit-discuss/20231106-venomous-raccoon-of-wealth-acc57c@nitro/) that was _not_ sent to linux-kernel, but to the Kernel Summit discussion list (ksummit-discuss) and the kernel.org users mailing list, Konstantin Ryabitsev described the problems he sees with the current status of the list. It has nearly 3000 subscribers and is copied on nearly every patch because of a wildcard entry at the end of the [`MAINTAINERS` file](https://www.kernel.org/doc/linux/MAINTAINERS); that, in turn, leads to around 3.1 million messages being delivered to inboxes daily based on the roughly 33,000 monthly posts to the list. But that does not work well when delivering to a whole bunch of Gmail addresses: 

> due to gmail's quota policies, this generally results in anywhere from 50K to 200K messages stuck in the queue all trying to deliver to gmail and being deferred with "this account is receiving too much mail" 

His suggested solution is to reroute the wildcard entry so that patches go to the [patches@lists.linux.dev](https://lore.kernel.org/linux-patches/) mailing list rather than linux-kernel. That will (eventually) reduce the volume on the list, thus ""unclog the outgoing queues and speed up mail delivery for everyone"". Currently, the `get_maintainer.pl` tool, which is often used with other tools like "`git send-email`", will pick up the entry for "THE REST" at the end of `MAINTAINERS`; the entry says to send everything to linux-kernel. The linux-patches list is available, for those who want it, via the [lei tool](https://people.kernel.org/monsieuricon/lore-lei-part-1-getting-started) or by anonymous POP3 for those who want to receive the patches that way—at Gmail, for instance. But direct subscriptions to linux-patches will be vetted so that the mechanism for overwhelming email providers with patches does not recur. 

Joe Perches, who maintains `get_maintainer.pl` and other development tools, [called](/ml/ksummit-discuss/2ee1a77665e770846a5868798393b8361d6d2033.camel@perches.com/) it an ""excellent idea""; Borislav Petkov [said](/ml/ksummit-discuss/20231106155252.GBZUkL1IKeITpgzfZC@fat_crate.local/) that CCing patches to linux-kernel was meant for archiving purposes, so a separate list should work just fine for that instead. Others, though, disagreed with one of the downsides of the current situation that Ryabitsev had listed: ""due to the sheer volume of messages, LKML is generally seen as useless for holding any actual discussions"". 

Eric W. Biederman [said](/ml/ksummit-discuss/87r0l2yi7v.fsf@email.froward.int.ebiederm.org/) that he at least skims linux-kernel with some frequency; Christoph Hellwig [agreed](/ml/ksummit-discuss/ZUkcyCb5DEVEDkKj@infradead.org/), adding that he does start discussions on that list as well. Meanwhile, Willy Tarreau [suggested](/ml/ksummit-discuss/20231107040433.GA23816@1wt.eu/) that it is a good way to keep abreast of kernel developments: 

> This way every day I can have a quick glance at all subjects there, that's how I discover new topics, patch series, discussions etc. I think that a non negligible number of LKML subscribers are there for this exact reason. 

He said that he would personally miss the patches that got moved to the other list, but he also questioned how much improvement the change would actually bring. Others also wondered about how much traffic would be reduced; Pavel Machek [thought](/ml/ksummit-discuss/ZUluOoDjp%2FawmXtF@duo.ucw.cz/) that the number of patches picked up by the wildcard was fairly low. Paolo Bonzini [said](/ml/ksummit-discuss/34eda1fe-0e14-4f12-b472-d152eadb7b88@redhat.com/) that it might be the configuration of `git send-email` that was actually causing the patches to be posted to linux-kernel, which means local changes would be needed to alter it; other developers did not think that was a common configuration, however. Laurent Pinchart [pointed out](/ml/ksummit-discuss/20231107101513.GB27932@pendragon.ideasonboard.com/) that the "[submitting patches](https://docs.kernel.org/process/submitting-patches.html)" document is rather ambiguous about sending patches to linux-kernel: 

> > linux-kernel@vger.kernel.org should be used by default for all patches, but the volume on that list has caused a number of developers to tune it out. Please do not spam unrelated lists and unrelated people, though. 
> 
> This should be updated, even if for the only reason that the text is quite confusing (in my opinion at least, I'm not sure if it means LKML should be used for all patches, or shouldn't). 

He also noted that, unlike some of the other responders, he has completely tuned out linux-kernel since the volume of email ""drowns the useful information in noise for me"". Greg Kroah-Hartman [said](/ml/ksummit-discuss/2023110701-overstuff-tidiness-10c2@gregkh/) that switching the tools to do the right thing will help; for example, the linux-usb mailing list is specified as where patches for the USB subsystem should go, but `get_maintainer.pl` still also lists linux-kernel for USB patches. The change suggested by Ryabitsev would avoid doing that, ""which is a good thing and should cut down on the overall size over time"". 

If that change is made, though, Julia Lawall [wondered](/ml/ksummit-discuss/20231107-skilled-calculating-frigatebird-8db1bb@nitro/) how she would be able to review ""the discussion that led up to a commit""; currently, looking at linux-kernel is ""the obvious place to go for that"". Dan Carpenter [suggested](/ml/ksummit-discuss/202ebed9-465e-43d1-bd3a-417ad4a5e425@kadam.mountain/) ""lore.kernel.org and b4 and lei"", while Pratyush Yadav [provided](/ml/ksummit-discuss/mafs0ttpxg0is.fsf_-_@kernel.org/) a detailed description of how to use those tools for tracking down a discussion. That procedure will find patches and discussions that occurred before he subscribed, which makes it ""more powerful and complete than subscribing to mailing lists"". Ryabitsev [pointed out](/ml/ksummit-discuss/20231107-skilled-calculating-frigatebird-8db1bb@nitro/) that all of the lists that are archived at [lore.kernel.org](https://lore.kernel.org/) are actually indexed together, so that searches using [lore.kernel.org/all](https://lore.kernel.org/all/) will find message IDs or subjects in all of the kernel lists—including linux-patches. 

There may well be a discussion about the idea in the Kernel Summit track at the upcoming [Linux Plumbers Conference](https://lpc.events/), or perhaps the [Maintainer Summit](https://events.linuxfoundation.org/linux-kernel-maintainer-summit/) the following day. That is presumably one reason that Ryabitsev posted to ksummit-discuss, though Carpenter [noted](/ml/ksummit-discuss/a53bcecb-3230-4ad3-8e62-29f4395a26a0@kadam.mountain/) that it makes a better forum for general topics than linux-kernel these days. 

There are probably as many different kernel-development styles as there are kernel developers—a number that grows with each release—so finding common ground between them all is difficult, if not outright impossible. The problems with mail delivery these days are real, sadly, and it is most certainly not only Gmail that causes those kinds of woes. Given that, which only seems to get worse over time, some kind of mailing-list fix is going to be needed; Ryabitsev's plan seems a reasonable approach that may well help. Beyond that, those who are using the large, free email providers may want to consider voluntarily switching their linux-kernel subscription elsewhere in order to improve the service and reliability of the mailing list for everyone else. 

  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Development model/Patch management](/Kernel/Index#Development_model-Patch_management)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
