# A new filesystem for pidfds [LWN.net]

> **Did you know...?**
> 
> LWN.net is a subscriber-supported publication; we rely on subscribers to keep the entire operation going. Please help out by [buying a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag4/subscribe) and keeping LWN on the net. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
March 13, 2024 

The [pidfd](/Articles/794707/) abstraction is a Linux-specific way of referring to processes that avoids the race conditions inherent in Unix process ID numbers. Since a pidfd is a file descriptor, it needs a filesystem to implement the usual operations performed on files. As the use of pidfds has grown, they have stressed the limits of the simple filesystem that was created for them. Christian Brauner has [created a new filesystem for pidfds](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240213-vfs-pidfd_fs-v1-0-f863f58cfce1@kernel.org/) that seems likely to debut in the 6.9 kernel, but it ran into a little bump along the way, demonstrating that things you cannot see can still hurt you. 

In this case, the pidfd filesystem is indeed invisible; it cannot be mounted and accessed like most other filesystems. A pidfd is created with a system call like [`pidfd_open()`](/Articles/789023/) or [`clone3()`](/Articles/792628/), so there is no need for a visible filesystem. (One _could_ imagine such a filesystem as a way of showing all of the existing processes in the system, but `/proc` already exists for that purpose). Since there was no need to implement many of the usual filesystem operations, pidfds were implemented using [`anon_inode_getfile()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/fs/anon_inodes.c#L127), a helper that creates file descriptors for simple, virtual filesystems. Over time, though, this filesystem has proved to be a bit too simple, leading to Brauner's pidfdfs proposal as a replacement. 

So what was the problem with the anonymous-inode approach? Brauner provides a list of capabilities added by pidfdfs in the changelog to [this patch](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240213-vfs-pidfd_fs-v1-2-f863f58cfce1@kernel.org/). It allows system calls like [`statx()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/statx.2.html) to be used on a pidfd, for example, and that, in turn, allows for direct comparison of two pidfds to see whether they refer to the same process. While not implemented yet, pidfdfs will enable functionality like automatically killing a process when the last pidfd referring to it is closed. The initial version of the series also used [`dentry_open()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/latest/source/fs/open.c#L1074) to set up the "file" behind the pidfd; that brought the opening of the pidfd under the control of Linux security modules and made the user-space file-notification system calls work with them as well. 

The patch series subsequently had to evolve considerably, though. Linus Torvalds [was not entirely happy](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=wjr+K+x8bu2=gSK8SehNWnY3MGxdfO9L25tKJHTUK0x0w@mail.gmail.com/) with how it had been implemented, even though much of that implementation was borrowed from the existing namespace filesystem in the kernel. Some significant reworking followed, resulting in a cleaner implementation that Torvalds [described](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=wgSjKuYHXd56nJNmcW3ECQR4=a5_14jQiUswuZje+XF_Q@mail.gmail.com/) as ""quite nice"". 

That was not the end of the story, though. Nathan Chancellor [reported](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240222190334.GA412503@dev-arch.thelio-3990X/) that, with pidfdfs in the kernel, many services on his system failed at boot time; Heiko Carstens [ran into similar problems](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240223101833.16153-A-hca@linux.ibm.com/). It turns out that, while users may or may not appreciate the robustness of race-free process management, they are, without exception, unimpressed by a system that lacks functional networking. So Brauner had to go looking for an explanation. 

It seems, though, that he [already knew where to look](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240223-delfin-achtlos-e03fd4276a34@brauner/) when ""something fails for completely inexplicable reasons"": the SELinux security module. As noted above, one of the advantages of the new filesystem is that it exposed pidfd operations to security modules, which is something that the policy maintainers had requested. The downside is that it exposed those operations to security modules, one of which promptly set about denying them. 

There was, as Brauner later [described](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240223-schusselig-windschatten-a108c9034c5b@brauner/), a bit of a cascade of failures here. SELinux started seeing events on a new type of file descriptor that it had no policy for; following fairly normal security practice, it responded by denying everything, causing attempts to work with pidfds to fail. The `dbus-broker` process, on seeing these failures, decided to just throw up its virtual hands and let the system collapse into a smoldering heap. This is somewhat ironic given that, as Brauner pointed out, that process has a PID-using fallback path that it uses on kernels that do not support pidfds at all, but it didn't use that path here. So, to truly fix this problem, there needs to be both an SELinux policy update and a D-Bus fix; patches for both have already been prepared and submitted. 

Even then, though, there was the little problem that some systems may get a new kernel before the above fixes arrive. The same users who have proved so strangely intolerant of broken networking are likely to also be slow to accept the idea that networking will only come back once their user-space code has been fixed and updated. Beyond that, Torvalds [didn't like the idea](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=wg0D8g_97_pakX-tC2DnANE-=6ZNY5bz=-hP+uHYyh4=g@mail.gmail.com/) that the internal filesystem change somehow caused the resulting descriptors to behave differently in user space, and requested that something better be done. 

After a bit of discussion, Brauner [found a solution](/ml/linux-fsdevel/20240224-altgedienten-meerwasser-1fb9de8f4050@brauner/). Rather than call `dentry_open()`, the new filesystem sets up the new file descriptor directly, using lower-level operations, and without invoking the problematic security hook. The people in charge of security modules still want to be able to intervene in pidfd creation, of course; that will be accommodated by adding a new security hook for that case. Once SELinux (or any other security module) is ready to make decisions about pidfds, it can use the new hook; until then, things will work as they did before. Torvalds [liked this approach](/ml/linux-fsdevel/CAHk-=whvWr5j6DZqepuNx1-ChgNxM++h1OfOPfKaJrC-TeSaDg@mail.gmail.com/): ""This is how new features go in: they act like the old ones, but have expanded capabilities that you can expose for people who want to use them"". 

With those changes, it would appear that the roadblocks to the addition of pidfdfs have been overcome. The code is in linux-next now, and will probably find its way to the mainline for the 6.9 release. Most users will, if all goes according to plan, never notice that anything has changed.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Filesystems](/Kernel/Index#Filesystems)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [pidfd](/Kernel/Index#pidfd)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
