# May the FOLL_FORCE not be with you [LWN.net]

> **We're bad at marketing**
> 
> We can admit it, marketing is not our strong suit. Our strength is writing the kind of articles that developers, administrators, and free-software supporters depend on to know what is going on in the Linux world. Please [subscribe today](/Promo/nsn-bad/subscribe) to help us keep doing that, and so we don’t have to get good at marketing. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
July 26, 2024 

One of the simplest hardening concepts to understand is that memory should never be both writable and executable, otherwise an attacker can use it to load and run arbitrary code. That rule is generally followed in Linux systems, but there is a glaring loophole that is exploitable from user space to inject code into a running process. Attackers have duly exploited it. A new effort to close the hole ran into trouble early in the merge window, but a solution may yet be found in time for the 6.11 kernel release. 

The special file `/proc/_PID_ /mem` provides read and write access to the virtual address space of the process identified by `_PID_`. It is used primarily by debuggers, but it has a place in other applications (certain types of user-space hardening, for example) as well. Writing to this file will overwrite the process's memory at the current file offset. Interestingly, the kernel function that implements writing to this file — [`mem_rw()`](https://elixir.bootlin.com/linux/v6.10/source/fs/proc/base.c#L838) — uses the `FOLL_FORCE` flag when accessing the target memory. That flag causes the write to succeed, regardless of whether the normal memory protections at the target address would allow writing. As a result, `/proc/_PID_ /mem` can be used to overwrite executable memory. 

This sort of capability serves as a sort of giant "welcome" mat to those who would compromise a system; in this case, it has been present for a long time. LWN [covered one exploit](/Articles/476947/) that used `/proc/_PID_ /mem` — in early 2012. Linus Torvalds [put a fix into the mainline](https://git.kernel.org/pub/scm/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/commit/?id=e268337dfe26dfc7efd422a804dbb27977a3cccc) in response to that disclosure, but it turned out to be insufficient; another [serious exploit](https://issues.chromium.org/issues/40089045) surfaced in 2017. That time around, Torvalds [applied a patch](https://git.kernel.org/linus/8ee74a91ac30) during the 4.12 merge window that removed the use of `FOLL_FORCE` from `mem_rw()` on the theory that, perhaps, nobody actually needs that behavior. The reality of the situation soon became clear, though, as various users complained; the [patch restoring `FOLL_FORCE`](https://git.kernel.org/linus/f511c0b17b08) that Torvalds merged for 4.12-rc4 included descriptions of some of those users, including the just-in-time compiler for the Julia language and the [rr debugger](https://rr-project.org/). 

So `FOLL_FORCE` remained for another seven years. Surprisingly, attackers have not gone away over that time either. So the interest in closing the `FOLL_FORCE` loophole is still around as well. Just before the opening of the 6.11 merge window, Christian Brauner sent [a pull request](/ml/all/20240712-vfs-procfs-ce7e6c7cf26b@brauner) containing [a patch](/ml/linux-kernel/20240613133937.2352724-2-adrian.ratiu@collabora.com/) from Adrian Ratiu that tried to improve the situation. Since disabling `FOLL_FORCE` entirely has proved to not be possible, Ratiu's patch added four kernel command-line parameters to allow administrators to control access to `/proc/_PID_ /mem`: 

  * `proc_mem.restrict_open_read`: controls whether the file can be opened for read access. 
  * `proc_mem.restrict_open_write`: controls opening for write access. 
  * `proc_mem.restrict_write`: controls whether writes are allowed on an open file descriptor. 
  * `proc_mem.restrict_foll_force`: disables the use of `FOLL_FORCE`. 



Setting any of these options to "`all`" applies the restriction to all processes in the system. If, instead, an option is set to "`ptracer`", then the given access is allowed only to a process that has already attached to the target process with [`ptrace()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/ptrace.2.html), as debuggers tend to do. The default is to apply no restrictions, retaining the behavior of current kernels. 

In the pull request, Brauner indicated a lack of enthusiasm for this approach: ""The level of fine-grained management isn't my favorite as it requires distributions to have some level of knowledge around the implications of FOLL_FORCE and /proc/<pid>/mem access in general"". He was able to overcome his reluctance to push the work to Torvalds, but the request [found a chillier welcome](/ml/all/CAHk-=wiGWLChxYmUA5HrT5aopZrB7_2VTa0NLZcxORgkUe5tEQ@mail.gmail.com) there: ""I pulled this, and looked at it, and then I decided I can't live with something this ugly"". He had complaints about the implementation, but also about the complicated set of command-line options and the logic needed to implement them; he rejected the pull request and suggested adding a single option to control `FOLL_FORCE` instead. 

Ratiu [responded](/ml/linux-kernel/20240717111358.415712-1-adrian.ratiu@collabora.com/) with a patch adding a single kernel-configuration option regulating the use of `FOLL_FORCE`. Kees Cook [responded](/ml/linux-kernel/202407171017.A0930117@keescook/) that a command-line parameter was still needed for developers to be able to test the restricted mode. Torvalds [dug up an old patch](/ml/linux-kernel/CAHk-=wi3m98GCv-kXJqRvsjOa+DCFqQux7pcmJW9WR8_n=QPqg@mail.gmail.com/) from previous iterations that enabled `FOLL_FORCE` only for the `ptrace()` case, suggesting that it could be adapted and used now. On July 23, Ratiu posted [a new patch](/ml/all/20240723171753.739971-1-adrian.ratiu@collabora.com) adding a boot-time parameter, called `proc_mem.force_override`, that can be set to "`never`" (to disable `FOLL_FORCE` entirely), "`ptrace`" (to enable just the `ptrace()` case), or "`always`" to preserve the existing behavior. There is also a build-time configuration option to control the default behavior in the absence of a command-line parameter. 

Torvalds [was much happier](/ml/all/CAHk-=wiJL59WxvyHOuz2ChW+Vi1PTRKJ+w+9E8d1f4QZs9UFcg@mail.gmail.com) with this version, though he still pointed out that it could be ""prettied up some more"" with a few changes. Ratiu [agreed](/ml/all/27ea5-66a0c680-3-322bfd00@171174474) with the suggestions, and posted [a followup version](/ml/all/20240726090858.71541-1-adrian.ratiu@collabora.com) with minor changes. 

The end of the 6.11 merge window is approaching; there are no guarantees that this work will be ready and accepted in time to land in this release. Given that it is a small change, though, and that it addresses a longstanding security problem, there will be interest in merging it sooner rather than later if possible. After that, it will be interesting to see how distributors set the default; the `ptrace` mode avoids breaking debuggers like GDB, but does not address all of the other use cases for `FOLL_FORCE`. If the damage from restricting `FOLL_FORCE` proves too painful, it may turn out that this loophole will remain open for years to come.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Releases/6.12](/Kernel/Index#Releases-6.12)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/Vulnerabilities](/Kernel/Index#Security-Vulnerabilities)  
[Security](/Security/Index/)| [Linux kernel](/Security/Index/#Linux_kernel)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
