# 2.6.8 and CD recording [LWN.net]

By far the loudest chorus of complaints about the 2.6.8.1 kernel comes from users who have found that they can no longer burn CDs. In most cases, the problem can be worked around by running the recording program from a root shell (setuid is not sufficient), but that is an unsatisfying alternative for many. Why, ask inquiring minds, did CD recording have to break with the new kernel? 

It's all a matter of trying to get the permissions right. Burning a CD requires sending a number of special-purpose SCSI commands to the drive, so the operation is performed outside of the regular I/O paths. But once you can send arbitrary commands, you can do more than write CDs. In pushing for changes, Alan Cox [put it this way](/Articles/98398/): 

With the current code I can destroy all your hard disks given read access to the drive. With checks on writable I can destroy all your hard disks/cdroms as appropriate with write access. Destroy here means "dead, defunct, pushing up the daisies, go order a new one kind of dead". 

Seeing this outcome as undesirable, Linus threw in [a patch](/Articles/98400/) shortly before releasing 2.6.8. This patch creates an array of known SCSI commands, associating each with "safe for read" and "safe for write" flags. Those flags are tested when a process attempts to execute the given command. If the device has been opened for read access, the set of allowed commands is relatively small: read, request sense, play CD, etc. A process with write access can execute more commands, but not the whole set. Any command not explicitly flagged as safe for the given open mode is restricted to processes with the `CAP_SYS_RAWIO` capability - root, for all practical purposes. 

This patch broke CD burning in multiple ways. Users of growisofs were burned (so to speak) because that utility opens the device for read access. That should never have worked, but did until now; fixing that problem will require a patch to the application. Beyond that, however, is the simple fact that numerous SCSI commands needed for CD burning were omitted from the "safe for write" list. These vary from locking the door to "send OPC," "blank", and many others. Enabling CD writing from an unprivileged process with write access to the drive will require adding several commands to the list. 

Unfortunately, expanding the list in that manner can bring back the original problem. Many commands which are safe to execute in one context can destroy data, firmware, or hardware in other contexts. And it can be very hard for the kernel to tell the difference between the two. There has been talk of expanding the checking framework to better understand the target device's operating modes and, perhaps, giving high- or low-level drivers a say in the decision. Down that road lies complexity, however, and it would be hard to reach a point where the developers could declare victory and call the problem solved. It may well be that, despite other faults in his reasoning on CD recording, Jörg Schilling [got it right](/Articles/98405/) when he suggested that the most secure mode of operation is to simply restrict device access and run the CD recording application in a setuid mode.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [CD recording/2.6.8 problems](/Kernel/Index#CD_recording-2.6.8_problems)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [SCSI/Command filtering](/Kernel/Index#SCSI-Command_filtering)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [Security/SCSI command filtering](/Kernel/Index#Security-SCSI_command_filtering)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
