# The kernel's command-line commotion [LWN.net]

> **This article brought to you by LWN subscribers**
> 
> Subscribers to LWN.net made this article — and everything that surrounds it — possible. If you appreciate our content, please [buy a subscription](/Promo/nst-nag3/subscribe) and make the next set of articles possible. 

By **Jonathan Corbet**  
November 27, 2024 

For the most part, the 6.13 merge window has gone smoothly, with relatively few problems or disagreements — other than [this one](/Articles/999197/), of course. There is one other exception, though, relating to the kernel's presentation of a process's command line to interested user-space observers when a relatively new system call is used. A pull request with a simple change to make that information more user-friendly ran afoul of Linus Torvalds, who has his own view of how it should be managed. 

When one looks at a running process, often the first item of interest is which program that process is running. The kernel makes that information available in two different places, both found within a process's `/proc` directory: 

  * [`comm`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/proc_pid_comm.5.html) holds the "command" that the process is running. When a program is launched with [`execve()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/execve.2.html), the base name of the executable file is placed in `comm`. So if the user runs `/usr/bin/rogue`, `comm` will contain "`rogue`". 
  * [`cmdline`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man5/proc_pid_cmdline.5.html) contains the entire command line passed to the running program via the `argv` array given to `execve()`; it traditionally holds the program name, which is passed as the first argument in the command line. 



The two files contain similar but different information, and have different access characteristics. `comm` will contain the actual file name that was passed to `execve()` (but keep on reading); it is also stored in a kernel data structure and can be accessed quickly. Instead, the command name in `cmdline` is whatever was passed to `execve()` as `argv[0]`, which may or may not be the actual name of the command. It is stored in the relevant process's address space, meaning that the process itself can change it, and accessing it from another process is a relatively expensive operation. For these reasons, programs like `ps` or `top` will use `comm` instead of `cmdline` when possible. 

As it happens, `execve()` is not the only way to launch a new program within a process on Linux. There is a library function called [`fexecve()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man3/fexecve.3.html) that takes an open file descriptor for the program to execute rather than its path name; under the hood, it is implemented with [`execveat()`](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/execveat.2.html). There is interest in using `fexecve()` because it allows the target program to be opened and checked (looking for a signature, for example), then executed in a race-free way. Tools like systemd have support for running programs this way, and its developers would prefer to use that mode. 

There is just one little problem. While `execve()` can initialize `comm` from the name of the file passed to it, `fexecve()` only has an open file descriptor that no longer has any path-name information associated with it. That file descriptor may be marked "close on exec", meaning that even any information that may have been found in `/proc/_PID_ /fd` will be lost. The result, in current kernels, is that, when a program is run with `fexecve()`, the `comm` is simply set to the file-descriptor number of the program. If `rogue` is run with `fexecve()` from file descriptor five, `comm` will contain "`5`" rather than "`rogue`". 

Users, being the irascible creatures that they are, have expressed the unreasonable opinion that replacing the command names of processes in their system-management tools with small integers is an unwelcome change. They have been spoiled by being able to see which program each process is running and feel entitled to that ability in the future. Kernel programming would be so much easier without users, but that is not the world we live in. So the search for a better way to set `comm` when `fexecve()` is used was begun. 

In [a mid-November pull request](/ml/all/202411190900.FE40FA5@keescook), Kees Cook included [a patch from Tycho Andersen](/ml/all/20241030203732.248767-1-tycho@tycho.pizza/) that tried to restore some useful information to `/proc/_PID_ /comm` in the `fexecve()` case. In the absence of the file name, the kernel would simply use the information from `argv[0]` instead, causing the information from `comm` and `cmdline` to be essentially the same. That patch had been through a few iterations, and seemed like a good solution to everybody involved. 

Torvalds, though, [disagreed](/ml/all/CAHk-=wgB1L75+C89AU62n4jBEiwKs=e4dvBDOoLQ13rUwJLFXQ@mail.gmail.com), saying that ""this horrible hack is too broken to live"". Over the course of an extended and not always courteous discussion, he [argued](/ml/all/CAHk-=wiJZDxO+Wgmg8f=Cio9AgmJ85V7do4kxroKejHNsS80hQ@mail.gmail.com/) that `argv[0]` is under user-space control and can contain any sort of information; the [kernel uses `comm`](/ml/all/CAHk-=whzKjzbZQ9a-ZvRFwj6X_wsQvNjiizyCzTryEQnZc_47A@mail.gmail.com/) for its own purposes, and letting user space control it could help attackers to hide the actual executable being run. Copying `argv[0]` into `comm` will slow program start, he said. The right solution, according to Torvalds, is to use the file name stored in the directory entry ("dentry") associated with the file to be executed. That information is always present and is reliably under the kernel's control. 

The problem with the dentry-based approach, as explained by [Eric Biederman](/ml/all/87jzcxv227.fsf@email.froward.int.ebiederm.org/), [Zbigniew Jędrzejewski-Szmek](/ml/all/Zz9sTFBQQSe1P8AI@kawka3.in.waw.pl/), and [Cook](/ml/all/202411211011.C2E3ABEAB@keescook/), is that it would change the name of the executable as seen by user space. As an example, a user may run `rogue`, but some helpful distributor may have long since turned `/usr/bin/rogue` into a symbolic link to `/usr/bin/nethack`. On current systems, a tool like `ps` will show this user, busily at work, running `rogue`, but a `comm` value derived from the dentry would use the actual file being executed, so it would show as `nethack` instead. On some systems, like Debian with its "alternatives" mechanism, the visible names of quite a few commands would change. That could break programs that are looking for specific command names. Setting `comm` from `argv[0]`, instead, would preserve the original name. 

Torvalds, though, [was unmoved](/ml/all/CAHk-=whF03ueoCM7M0vbcTy7fRvv+g9h_rnafurNJ1OEj71cEA@mail.gmail.com/) by this argument. The dentry-based name, he said, is ""THE TRUTH"", and any program that wants to see `argv[0]` should just be using `cmdline` instead. Anybody who wants the behavior of `execve()` should just not use `fexecve()`, he added. The patch, as written, would not be pulled into the mainline. Cook [tried one more time](/ml/all/202411211302.08EEE6D395@keescook/) to explain why using `argv[0]` was desirable. It is the ""friendlier"" choice, he said, but if Torvalds was adamant that the dentry-based name must be used, that was going to be the result of the discussion. Torvalds [responded](/ml/all/CAHk-=wjRE5S_vpQdRH-ZH2Q6SU1cmX0HhwzmfpjgYtoQAtok=Q@mail.gmail.com/): ""no. THERE IS NO WAY I WILL ACCEPT THE GARBAGE THAT IS ARGV[0]"". 

This response seemed to indeed be somewhat adamant, so Cook has subsequently [resent his pull request](/ml/all/202411210651.CD8B5A3B98@keescook/) without the controversial patch, saying that the dentry-based approach would be implemented for the 6.14 merge window. Jędrzejewski-Szmek [said](/ml/all/Z0A3EkxZZg19Dp9Q@kawka3.in.waw.pl/) that this approach could be worked with, ""but we'll need to make an effort to warn users and do it much more visibly"". There will, he said, inevitably be complaints from users whose scripts have broken. 

In the end, this disagreement comes down to a small piece of the kernel's user-space interface that has existed almost since the beginning, but which has never been precisely specified. As with any user-visible behavior, programs have developed a reliance on the way things have traditionally worked, making newer approaches (such as `execve()` from a file descriptor) hard to implement without breaking things. There may be no ideal solution in this case, but it would have been nice if a workable solution could have been found with less shouting.  
Index entries for this article  
---  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [/proc](/Kernel/Index#proc)  
[Kernel](/Kernel/Index)| [System calls/execveat()](/Kernel/Index#System_calls-execveat)  
  


* * *

to post comments 
